[Amit Varma]: On December 6, 1992, a group of young men climbed on top of a mosque in Ayodhya and
[Amit Varma]: demolished a part of India.
[Amit Varma]: It was a symbolic moment for our country, but I'd argue that it wasn't a seminal
[Amit Varma]: one.
[Amit Varma]: It wasn't a turning point.
[Amit Varma]: There were forces that happened to be gathering strength at that point and what was destroyed
[Amit Varma]: that day would have been destroyed anyway.
[Amit Varma]: There was a cultural movement that had been on the rise for a century.
[Amit Varma]: There was a political movement that was on the upswing and about to become unstoppable.
[Amit Varma]: December 6, 1992 was just one milestone in the journey that has brought us to December
[Amit Varma]: 6, 2020.
[Amit Varma]: In these 28 years, our politics has changed, our society has changed, our country has changed.
[Amit Varma]: And it's worth looking back at how all this happened.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: If modern Indian politics has been taken over by the jugalbandi of Narendra Modi and Amit
[Amit Varma]: Shah, this pair of politicians was enabled by an earlier jugalbandi before them, that
[Amit Varma]: of Atal Bihari Vajpayee and Lal Krishna Advani.
[Amit Varma]: For decades, Vajpayee and Advani fought what appeared to be a losing battle until they
[Amit Varma]: won.
[Amit Varma]: No matter which side of the political spectrum you're on, this is a fascinating story.
[Amit Varma]: To understand India, we have to understand the rise of Hindu nationalism and the rise
[Amit Varma]: of the BJP.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is Vinay Sitapati, author of the marvelous book, Jugalbandi, the BJP before
[Amit Varma]: Modi.
[Amit Varma]: Vinay has been a lawyer, a journalist, and a political scientist.
[Amit Varma]: And when you read his book, you'll find that he's a fine historian and writer as well.
[Amit Varma]: Jugalbandi looks at the evolution of political Hindu nationalism through the prism of the
[Amit Varma]: partnership between Vajpayee and Advani, a friendship that spanned decades and was even
[Amit Varma]: a bit of a bromance, actually.
[Amit Varma]: The book busts the simple stereotypes that linger around both men and gave me great insight
[Amit Varma]: into the RSS, the motivations of Hindu nationalism, and how this was a bottom-up movement in which
[Amit Varma]: the politicians were merely rational actors responding to incentives from the demand side
[Amit Varma]: of the political marketplace.
[Amit Varma]: And that remains the case even in this age of Modi and Shah.
[Amit Varma]: Before I begin my conversation with Vinay though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: A friend of mine once advised me to end each day by asking myself the question, what have
[Amit Varma]: I learned today?
[Amit Varma]: Luckily, we live in times when a world of knowledge is at our fingertips.
[Amit Varma]: This episode is sponsored by an awesome site called The Great Courses Plus, where I've
[Amit Varma]: been flipping through a bunch of fascinating courses.
[Amit Varma]: If you head on over to thegreatcoursesplus.com, you'll find a crazy library of online courses
[Amit Varma]: on subjects ranging from music, math, cooking, history, political theory, and anything else
[Amit Varma]: you can think of.
[Amit Varma]: Here's one that I've enjoyed checking out, Games People Play, Game Theory in Life, Business
[Amit Varma]: and Beyond, taught by Scott P. Stevens.
[Amit Varma]: This course consists of 24 lectures about game theory, and it touches on two sports
[Amit Varma]: I'm passionate about, poker and chess.
[Amit Varma]: It's just one of many great courses at The Great Courses Plus, and you can get one month
[Amit Varma]: of unlimited free access if you use the following URL, thegreatcoursesplus.com slash unseen.
[Amit Varma]: You can even stream the courses on The Great Courses Plus app, including in an audio only
[Amit Varma]: version that is perfect for podcast listeners.
[Amit Varma]: Remember, you can check this out for free by signing up at thegreatcoursesplus.com slash
[Amit Varma]: unseen.
[Amit Varma]: That's right, unseen, thegreatcoursesplus.com slash unseen for one month of unlimited free
[Amit Varma]: access.
[Amit Varma]: What are you waiting for?
[Amit Varma]: Vinay, welcome to The Scene and The Unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you very much, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: You know, before we start, and I must say I enjoyed reading your book enormously, tons
[Amit Varma]: of insights in there for someone like me.
[Amit Varma]: Let's talk a bit about your personal journey though.
[Amit Varma]: You know, this is of course, your second biography, your first one was of D. V. Narsimha Rao.
[Amit Varma]: But let's even sort of go a little further back in time, you know, what did you want
[Amit Varma]: to do when you were growing up?
[Amit Varma]: You've described yourself elsewhere as a child of liberalization in the sense that your dad
[Amit Varma]: shifted from a PSU to a private sector company and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about the young Vinay.
[Amit Varma]: What was he like?
[Amit Varma]: What did he want to do?
[Amit Varma]: What were the different sort of routes you took through your life?
[Guest]: Well, Amit, when I had to apply for a master's degree or PhD, you have to write these personal
[Guest]: statements, right?
[Guest]: And I realized when it came to my personal statement that there wasn't a narrative.
[Guest]: I was just kind of following instinct.
[Unknown]: So I think your listeners won't get like, when I write my books, I make sure there's
[Unknown]: a narrative, right?
[Guest]: Like Vajpayee is born and then Advani is born and then they kind of move up with the arc
[Unknown]: of history.
[Unknown]: Now, unfortunately, that's not the case with me.
[Guest]: So you know, to give you a sense, I'm 37.
[Guest]: So I'm a child of the 1990s.
[Guest]: And you know, my father had, you know, he worked for Ex-Im Bank, which was a PSU.
[Guest]: And then he left in the early 90s to start off on his own as a consultant.
[Guest]: And I remember it was a very dislocating time for all of us, you know, that in Nehruvian
[Guest]: India, if you are a government employee, you know, you had a nice house, you know, you
[Guest]: had like a car and a driver, it was all as long as you're in government service, it's
[Guest]: a pretty comfy life, I think prior to 91, then he made it out on his own and you know,
[Guest]: this was a rough and tumble of the early private sector.
[Guest]: And I still remember, you know, we didn't have a car and okay, whatever, but you know,
[Guest]: when you're a kid, you know, people kids talk, they make jokes, you know, it's a it's a thing.
[Guest]: And so it stayed with me and I couldn't quite understand it or I couldn't quite make sense
[Guest]: of it at that time, but I knew that there was a shift, for example, I remember sometime
[Guest]: around 95.
[Guest]: So I'm, you know, born and brought up in Bandra, I'm from Bandra.
[Guest]: And I remember McDonald's coming for the first time, you know, in Linking Road.
[Guest]: And we all went there.
[Guest]: And there was this huge line, you know, and it was so long a line that they had dedicated,
[Unknown]: you know, servers to come with the menu.
[Guest]: And so you can order while you're in that line, and that line kind of sneaked through
[Guest]: Linking Road.
[Guest]: Then again, like I couldn't mix and I remember Baba Sehgal and you know, that kind of thing.
[Guest]: And again, you know, it's not that I could make sense of it at that time.
[Guest]: But I remember looking back, there was something dislocating about it, you know, and it took
[Guest]: me a while to realize that my immediate story is also the largest story of many Indians
[Guest]: during that period.
[Guest]: Then the other sort of, again, in the early 90s, you know, something that I grew up with
[Guest]: was the rise of the BJP, you know, in 95.
[Guest]: The Shiv Sena BJP comes to power for the first time in Maharashtra, where I was, and it ended
[Unknown]: basically a total hegemony of the Congress.
[Unknown]: So even the non-Congress governments in Maharashtra until then was broadly splinter groups, broadly,
[Guest]: you know.
[Guest]: And I remember very clearly the Bombay riots, you know, immediately after the demolition
[Guest]: of Babri Masjid whose anniversary is right now.
[Guest]: So this is, you know, just soon after December 6, 92.
[Guest]: And I remember, you know, we were on this side of the Mahim Creek in Bandra Reclamation.
[Guest]: And I remember we could all get on to the top of our building and look at the timber
[Guest]: yards owned by Muslims on the other side of the creek burning.
[Guest]: And again, I couldn't, you know, this, like, you know, whatever, I was a kid.
[Guest]: So none of this kind of, you know, made sense to me at that time.
[Guest]: But looking back, I think some of it may have lingered, you know, and my first book was
[Guest]: definitely a way to make sense of liberalization.
[Guest]: And I focused on a person, Narasimha Rao, and sort of the core of the argument of the
[Guest]: book is that liberalization wasn't fated to happen.
[Guest]: You know, McDonald's, it wasn't an inevitable march of history that McDonald's would open
[Guest]: in Linky Grove.
[Guest]: But it was, there was a lot of political maneuvering, right, done by the Prime Minister of the day
[Guest]: that allowed it to happen against the arc of history.
[Guest]: So in some sense, I was pushing against those who say that with the collapse of the Soviet
[Guest]: Union, you know, with, you know, the decline of the Indian economy, you know, this was
[Guest]: inevitable.
[Guest]: I, you know, and so that was the argument for that book.
[Guest]: And for this book, you know, I guess, you know, I was looking a little more at Hindu
[Guest]: nationalism, a little less as a biography.
[Guest]: So as you've read, I mean, firstly, it's a biography of a relationship, right?
[Guest]: It's not just a biography and the relationship itself is a symbol for the larger question
[Guest]: why the BJP wins, like what is the Hindu nationalism and why the BJP wins.
[Guest]: So in that sense, this is more of a kind of a classically academic or scholarly question,
[Guest]: which is, you know, what explains the hundred year story of the BJP.
[Guest]: But even so, I can, you know, I do sense looking back that, you know, that it's not a coincidence
[Guest]: that these are my two books and I was a child of the 90s.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, that's fascinating and you brought memories stumbling back because when McDonald's
[Amit Varma]: opened here, I remember sort of being in an auto going through Linking Road and realizing
[Amit Varma]: that the line to McDonald's started in Khar.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that was because I was part of the line, that was part of the...
[Amit Varma]: Well, you alone didn't make it stretch all the way to Khar, but yeah, you were one of
[Amit Varma]: the sort of unwashed masses, you know, and I mean, I didn't join the line that day, but
[Amit Varma]: I joined the line some other day.
[Guest]: Also Amit, it's actually the washed masses because, you know, McDonald's at that time
[Unknown]: was an upper class thing.
[Unknown]: You know, it's not, it was an upper middle class idea, whereas in the United States,
[Guest]: the people who go to McDonald's tend to be poorer, right, generally.
[Guest]: In that time period, you were looking at that line, it was the aspiration for upper middle
[Guest]: class India.
[Amit Varma]: Well, you know, if I have to quibble with that trivial point, I could also say that
[Amit Varma]: number one, you know, people down the line might consider it offensive that you are implying
[Amit Varma]: that they don't wash and that washing, you know, goes up in frequency with the classes.
[Amit Varma]: And also, you know, if a future biographer of yours is to, you know, eventually investigate
[Amit Varma]: your life, I'm sure he'll, in hindsight, stick a narrative to it, just as you know, all biographies
[Amit Varma]: have to have.
[Amit Varma]: And a little bit of that is emerging now.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, taking off from what you just said, I sort of have a question there.
[Amit Varma]: As you said in your first book, one of the points that you were making is that liberalization
[Amit Varma]: wasn't inevitable, the things that happened weren't inevitable.
[Amit Varma]: Now, one of my frequent bugbears often is that we don't think probabilistically about
[Amit Varma]: the world in the sense that whenever something has happened, we assume that it was inevitable.
[Amit Varma]: While obviously, at any given point in time, we only have a sea of probabilities ahead
[Amit Varma]: of us.
[Amit Varma]: But in hindsight, there is an inevitability.
[Amit Varma]: And that can lead us to underplay both the role of chance and the role of individuals.
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, there's one sort of common strand in history that you must have grappled
[Amit Varma]: with about how, you know, there's no such thing as a great man theory of history.
[Amit Varma]: And it's all, you know, there are larger currents which determine how the world's move.
[Amit Varma]: But the more I read of history and including much of what is in this book, it just strikes
[Amit Varma]: me that chance events really make so much of a difference, like you've brought up various
[Amit Varma]: counterfactuals in your book, which we'll discuss when we get to it.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems that the history of the country could have been different had we proceeded
[Amit Varma]: down a slightly different line.
[Amit Varma]: So what is your sense of this?
[Amit Varma]: And this is really a dual question.
[Amit Varma]: One is that there are, I suppose, different academic approaches to history.
[Amit Varma]: And is it then you sometimes find that you have to set those aside when you are actually,
[Amit Varma]: you know, performing the task of writing history or doing history as it were.
[Amit Varma]: And what are sort of your views on all this?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, would you also tend to say that chance is actually the biggest determinate, you know,
[Guest]: of what really happens?
[Guest]: Well, that's a very good question, Amit.
[Guest]: And as you can see, in both this book, as well as the Narsimha Rao book, I spend a lot
[Guest]: of time playing up the role of events and individuals, right?
[Guest]: I wouldn't call it chance alone, right?
[Unknown]: Because events happen for a variety of like, let's take emergency, it's not luck.
[Guest]: But as you read in the book, the emergency has played a huge role in socializing the
[Guest]: RSS and BJP of that era, note I mean of that era, right, into respecting civil liberties,
[Unknown]: you know, because they realize that, look, if we put people in jail, they can also put
[Guest]: us in jail, you know, and the law is what kind of comes in between that, or, you know,
[Guest]: in the book itself, I point out the murder of Mahatma Gandhi.
[Guest]: And I'm quite clear that the institutions of Hindu nationalism, namely Hindu Mahasabha
[Guest]: at the time and RSS didn't play a role.
[Unknown]: But the ideology totally did in the sense that the RSS criticism of Gandhi was shared
[Guest]: by Godse.
[Unknown]: 100%.
[Unknown]: Right?
[Guest]: It's just that the RSS didn't want to take any violent action, you know, to act on that
[Guest]: inference.
[Guest]: But as a consequence, the Indian state came down very hard on the RSS, very, very hard.
[Unknown]: Even today, even today, almost what 70 years later, the RSS remembers that period between
[Guest]: February 1948, and I think July 1949, as its most traumatic period, all the pracharats
[Guest]: were thrown in jail, the head of the RSS, Bulwarkar was thrown in jail.
[Guest]: And you know, it's sort of, it pushes the RSS, which until that time was an anti-political
[Guest]: organization, which was critical of electoral politics into creating a political party,
[Guest]: the Jansan, which is a precursor of the BJP, as political insurance.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So that's, again, just one example to show exactly the point you're making.
[Guest]: At the same time, I mean, I am, you know, I'm a trained academic, right?
[Unknown]: Like I have like, you know, like, you know, given that academics don't make much money,
[Guest]: I tell my larger family, look, I have five degrees, you know, and that's taught me something
[Guest]: and it's taught me that structure, demographics also make a difference, right?
[Guest]: So to give you one example, I point out that a lot of events in the 1980s, Rath Yatra,
[Guest]: for example, helped in the mobilization of the BJP.
[Guest]: But fundamentally, the rise of the BJP began as a set of demographic anxieties, right,
[Guest]: which are bottom up.
[Guest]: So for example, Hindu fear of all castes because of the Khalistan movement, because Khalistanis
[Guest]: were targeting Hindus as Hindus, right?
[Guest]: And the upper caste North Indian fears because of the extension of OBC reservation in Northern
[Guest]: Indian states, right?
[Guest]: All this worry that Saudi petrodollars is going to fuel conversions in India, exemplified
[Guest]: by the controversy surrounding the 1981 Meenakshi Kurang conversions in Tamil Nadu, a small
[Guest]: town in Tamil Nadu.
[Unknown]: So these are not just events and individuals, right?
[Guest]: These are like larger forces that are reshaping India.
[Guest]: And I think that, I mean, I'd love to discuss this, that my dual training as a journalist
[Guest]: and an academic makes me alive to both, you know, and this book is both, you know, so
[Unknown]: if a journalist reads it, what she or he will find nice about the book is it talks about
[Unknown]: like these larger structural stories that journalists don't focus on, right?
[Guest]: And in academics, what they like is that it focuses on events and individuals which normally
[Guest]: they don't focus on.
[Guest]: And I think it's a serious error on the part of academics that they don't do this.
[Guest]: And you know, I mean, I'm not a historian, I'm a political scientist, right?
[Guest]: So this, I mean, I'm looking at a hundred year political history of the BJP, but my
[Guest]: training is as a political scientist.
[Unknown]: So I'm interested in causation, right?
[Unknown]: I'm not just interested in narration.
[Guest]: So the end of the book, as you'll see, I give you a set of arguments for why, what Hindu
[Guest]: nationalism is.
[Guest]: Look, it's not fascist, it's majoritarian, and also why the BJP wins, right?
[Guest]: And the 1980s itself, I give you a complex set of causal arguments because causation
[Guest]: matters to me.
[Guest]: And if causation matters to you, like, you know, what causes the rise of the BJP rather
[Guest]: than just give a description of the BJP and say, you know, like I keep telling my students
[Guest]: that, you know, when you're explaining anything, it can't be a Gujarati thali with like a hundred
[Guest]: explanations, right?
[Guest]: You have to say that, look, the BJP rose because of A and B and not C and D. That's very important
[Guest]: for me, right?
[Guest]: That you also have to exclude the arguments that you don't think work.
[Guest]: Otherwise, it's a bit of a cop out to say that, look, there's a bit of everything, right?
[Unknown]: But if you have that kind of mentality, then you should be open that, look, occasionally
[Guest]: events matter, occasionally individuals matter, occasionally structures matter, right?
[Guest]: Like to give you another example, unrelated to India, I mean, let's look at the Brexit,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: The decision of the United Kingdom to leave the European Union.
[Guest]: A lot of that is explained through personalities, you know, the personalities of the times.
[Guest]: Just looking at these larger structural reasons, globalization, decline of white working class
[Guest]: pride, you won't get Brexit.
[Guest]: And if you are a social scientist who is honest or wants to be honest about not like peddling
[Guest]: your pet disciplinary lens, but finding an answer to the truth, you have to be kind of
[Guest]: ecumenical about the approaches that you use.
[Guest]: That's how I came to it.
[Guest]: I mean, in fact, I would say that, you know, I began my career as a lawyer, in the sense
[Guest]: I studied at National Law School, Bangalore and Harvard Law School.
[Guest]: And I then, you know, worked as a journalist with Indian Express, I would say the best
[Guest]: political newspaper in India in English.
[Guest]: And then I've also been an academic.
[Guest]: So I luckily for me, like this three careers that I've had, has given me, you know, a bullshit
[Guest]: detector about what is what any of those sort of professions can add value.
[Guest]: And what is just the added the added ingredients to the profession that has nothing to do with
[Guest]: actual value, right?
[Guest]: So for example, lawyers are trained to write petitions in a certain kind of way.
[Unknown]: Now, it's not very well written, it's not very logical, if you look at, you know, Supreme
[Guest]: Court judgments, they're not well written.
[Guest]: But one of the reasons they're written using a lot of jargon is to prevent non lawyers
[Guest]: from writing it.
[Guest]: Otherwise, the lawyers, why would you go to a lawyer, you can write your own petition,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Academia is like that, you have like entire disciplines like to focus on jargon, because
[Unknown]: if they, you know, if they were very clear about what they were trying to say, people
[Guest]: will say, why are we paying this, you know, why are we paying the salary?
[Guest]: So it's given me I think, luckily for me, I and so I don't have to, you know, put myself
[Unknown]: in a box that way.
[Unknown]: I mean, and I'm very proud of that, I think you're like that, you know, somebody says,
[Guest]: are you a blogger?
[Guest]: Are you an advertising?
[Guest]: Are you a podcaster?
[Guest]: You know, I don't think you think of yourself that way.
[Guest]: And that's quite liberating.
[Guest]: You know,
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, in retrospect, at least in my case, it seems like a feature and not a bug.
[Amit Varma]: But at the time, who knows, I do intend to, you know, explore more of your personal journey.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, we'll get deep into the book as well.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, you know, there's a question I'd save for, you know, in part of in my list
[Amit Varma]: of closing questions, which are more broad, but it kind of comes up.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll mention it again.
[Amit Varma]: And this actually goes contrary to the last point that I raised.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a question about whether there is something specific in the drift of political
[Amit Varma]: movements that is inevitable.
[Amit Varma]: And the question sort of struck me first, when I was reading about what happened right
[Amit Varma]: after Gandhiji's assassination, where, you know, obviously, Godse had once been part
[Amit Varma]: of the RSS, but not for a long time.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, it's very clear, the RSS had no role to play.
[Amit Varma]: And secondly, while the RSS was banned, the Hindu Mahasabha wasn't banned, partly because
[Amit Varma]: of course, Shamab Prasad Mukherjee was in the cabinet, but also because the past that
[Amit Varma]: we realized that even though these people were in the Hindu Mahasabha, they were a sort
[Amit Varma]: of an extremist faction of it.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you know, there's no need to blame the whole party or the movement for
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: But when I look at modern times, what also appears to me to be the case is that within
[Amit Varma]: the BJP also, you have sort of this move towards the extremes in the sense that you get from
[Amit Varma]: Shamab Prasad to Vajpayee to Advani to Modi to Shah to perhaps Adityanath and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And this seems to be a drift that, you know, when you think about it is perfectly rational,
[Amit Varma]: because you can't whip up your foot soldiers with moderation, you whip them up with by
[Amit Varma]: getting more and more extreme, even within a party, that's perhaps how you compete.
[Amit Varma]: Even within social media, when you look at how ideological echo chambers are formed,
[Amit Varma]: and what you need to raise your, to signal your virtue in those echo chambers that you
[Amit Varma]: belong to, it seems that a drift towards extremism is inevitable.
[Amit Varma]: So in any ideological party or group, do you think the drift towards extremism is inevitable?
[Amit Varma]: Or am I just or is it just the availability heuristic that these examples are coming to
[Amit Varma]: my mind?
[Guest]: Because I've just read your book?
[Guest]: No, no, you're definitely on to something, right?
[Guest]: Which is that that has been the general trajectory you see of the BJP.
[Guest]: So I think that's like a fact.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So let's just see why that is the case.
[Guest]: One is I don't think it's a, it's a constant move towards extremism, because even in this
[Guest]: 100 year history, you've had a lot of ups and downs, right?
[Guest]: So to give you an example, between 1986 and 1995, or 1994, the BJP was in a more quote
[Guest]: unquote extremist or radical mode.
[Guest]: But after that, between 95, 96, all the way to I would say even 2014, it was in a much
[Unknown]: more moderate mode, right?
[Unknown]: So you do have a little bit of a yin and yang, right?
[Guest]: And I argue that a lot of that has to do with electoral politics, in the sense that you're
[Guest]: trying to understand what the mood is of the voter.
[Guest]: So you have these ups and downs.
[Guest]: So that said, I think that this general trajectory you're talking about, about the BJP or Janssang
[Guest]: BJP has a lot to do Amit with, you know, and I make this point repeatedly in the book that
[Guest]: the, especially after the murder of the Mahatma, Hindu nationalism is on back foot, you know,
[Guest]: it is untouchable, you know, nobody wants to, you know, have anything to do with it.
[Guest]: And so I think that is the period that socializes Vajpayee and Advani, you know, that between,
[Guest]: you know, after the murder of the Mahatma, Hindu nationalism has to always kind of, you
[Guest]: know, whatever its private feelings, right, it has to kind of merge with the larger parliamentary
[Guest]: opposition.
[Guest]: And I think today you have a very different majority that Narendra Modi enjoys, like at
[Guest]: the height of his power, Vajpayee only had 170 to 180 seats, right?
[Guest]: Something like that.
[Guest]: This is in the, you know, the 98 and 99 elections, Narendra Modi has a clear majority, he doesn't
[Guest]: need the Shiv Sena, he doesn't need the Akali, he doesn't need a simple ally.
[Guest]: A lot of it has to do with that background and really to understand Advani and Vajpayee,
[Guest]: you have to understand that the circumstances that they were doing politics in broadly required
[Guest]: a Hindu nationalism that had to appear moderate, right?
[Guest]: There were, of course, exceptions like the Rath Yatra, etc, etc.
[Guest]: I think those times have changed now.
[Guest]: So I won't, you know, and who knows, you know, in the future, if you have certain demographic
[Guest]: changes, where the Hindu voter is much less radical, you may have a much less radical
[Guest]: Hindu politics.
[Guest]: Because you've seen that before, Amit, like, you know, I argue in the book that the 1920s
[Guest]: were a period where you had Hindu and Muslim anxiety and sort of the core argument of the
[Guest]: book is that it's driven by the introduction of elections, right?
[Guest]: But what you have is a moderate Hindu leader, namely Mohandas Gandhi, who is a Hindu leader,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And I can't stress that enough, when he passes away in 1948, when he's murdered, Mohamad Ali
[Guest]: Jinnah now in Pakistan famously says a great leader of the Hindu community has died, right?
[Guest]: I mean, Gandhi's language, his dress was a, you know, all of that was Hindu, except he
[Guest]: wasn't anti-Muslim.
[Guest]: That was and he was able to moderate those fears, right?
[Guest]: But in 1980s, you know, when you had Hindu anxiety, once again, in the air, you didn't
[Guest]: have a moderate Hindu leader, right?
[Guest]: So therefore, you have you ended up with much more radicalization, and that just goes back
[Guest]: to the first thing we were discussing, Amit, that, you know, to understand politics, you
[Guest]: have to, it's a complex game, you have to understand this interaction between, you know,
[Guest]: so the nature of the voter matters, but leaders can often sort of tamper that down or exaggerate
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: And there's no simple answer to that question.
[Guest]: And you have to look at focus at particular events to see what is going on there.
[Amit Varma]: So just kind of thinking aloud and carrying on from there, you know, while you point out
[Amit Varma]: that there was an ebb and flow from say, the 80s onwards, until now, it is also the case
[Amit Varma]: that that ebb and flow might have been in the politics itself, that is in the supply
[Amit Varma]: side of the political marketplace, but in the demand side of the marketplace, it just
[Amit Varma]: continued down the road of extremism in the sense of the reason Vajpayee was replaced
[Amit Varma]: was because he didn't get that he was moving towards this moderate path of Gandhi and socialism
[Amit Varma]: as he called it, and then, you know, after 84, he had to be replaced because they did
[Amit Varma]: so badly.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, then Advani was forced to take the party in the sort of other direction.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm also struck by this interesting Amit Shah quote from your book where Amit Shah
[Amit Varma]: in 2019 is asked about the difference between the pair of Atal Bihari Vajpayee and LK Advani
[Amit Varma]: and himself and Narendra Modi.
[Amit Varma]: And you quote him as saying, quote, they never believed that fully waving the Hindutva flag
[Amit Varma]: could win them votes.
[Amit Varma]: This is a difference between us and them, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: So in a sense, you know, even the move towards Hindutva that, you know, Advani and Vajpayee
[Amit Varma]: seem to go towards seems kind of reactive to what they feel will win them votes, and
[Amit Varma]: a correction of the previous mistake at not recognizing that, whereas, you know, Shah's
[Amit Varma]: drift seems to be that he and Modi are more of true believers and those guys were so so
[Guest]: any I think that's right, but that still goes to the demand, at least in part amid the demand
[Guest]: side part of the argument, look, the creation of a unified Hindu vote bank today, right,
[Guest]: which is that is really the big story of 21st century India, where the BJP is not an upper
[Unknown]: class party, because an upper class party could get 20% of the votes, right?
[Unknown]: Many of my left liberal friends go on and on about how and I'm saying, look, if it's
[Unknown]: up, I think they don't know if it's an upper class party that you're not going to win a
[Unknown]: single election in India.
[Guest]: You can't, you know, and if you wear a mask for 100 years, you end up with an OBC prime
[Guest]: minister and a Dalit president.
[Guest]: And that consolidation that the BJP is having, for example, in the 2019 elections, Modi won
[Guest]: more Dalit, OBC and tribal than anyone else, right than anyone else with a plurality than
[Guest]: anyone else.
[Guest]: This is the big story to me of the 20th of the late 20th and early 20th century, because
[Unknown]: that changes the nature radically changes the nature of politics, including the supply
[Guest]: side, you know, a lot of the supply of politics in India is premised on the fact that no group
[Guest]: in no voting group in India is more than 15-16%, you know, and a lot of the politics is based
[Guest]: on that presumption and the kind of internal party coalitions you can get or external coalitions.
[Guest]: Now, given that, you know, that social reality is changing in India, you're going to get
[Guest]: a very different form of politics.
[Guest]: Part of the reason that social reality has changed is a hundred year project of the RSS
[Guest]: because as I point out, you know, from the 1920s itself, Savarkar understands that the
[Guest]: social unification of Hindus has an immediate electoral benefit.
[Guest]: So in other words, political individualism, right, can be used if you have a social majority.
[Guest]: He understands that, right.
[Guest]: So part of it is the work of the RSS, etc, etc.
[Guest]: But part of it, I mean, they are ground up forces like urbanization, right, where you
[Guest]: have, you know, Hindus of various castes moving from the village to the city, and their caste
[Guest]: identity gets diluted just a little bit, but their religious identity gets heightened,
[Guest]: you know, you're seeing that, and that is not, that is likely to be a modernization
[Guest]: story, which is a bottom-up story rather than just top-down, right.
[Unknown]: And so while I hear you, right, that leaders matter, I mean, I mean, you know, this is
[Guest]: my second kind of biography.
[Guest]: But in this book, I'm much more alive to the fact that, you know, the story of Hindu nationalism
[Guest]: is a story of Indians and of Indians changing as much as it is a supply-side story.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm fascinated by something you just said, which is, of course, I mean, one is a truism
[Amit Varma]: that caste identities do get diluted a little bit when you come to cities, because larger
[Amit Varma]: economic networks, greater costs of discrimination and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But you also said that religious identities get heightened.
[Amit Varma]: Now why is that?
[Amit Varma]: Is that sort of because of the ghettoization that can sometimes happen within cities or,
[Guest]: you know, can you explain that for me?
[Guest]: You know, Amit, one of the things I take very seriously as a researcher is that if you haven't
[Guest]: researched something, don't give gyaan, you know.
[Guest]: And this is something that I have as a kind of background music in the book, right.
[Guest]: And it's based on secondary sources.
[Unknown]: It's not primary work that I did, like I did like about 200 interviews.
[Guest]: You know, I did a lot of archival work, both, you know, the party archives as well.
[Guest]: But this is something that, and frankly, I don't think there's very good material to
[Guest]: understand what you said.
[Guest]: It's a reality that is unfolding in our eyes.
[Guest]: So I have some access to secondary literature, but I, you know, I would rather like, you
[Guest]: know, tell the listener something that I know confidently rather than speculate, you know.
[Guest]: So I can sense it.
[Unknown]: And I think we, you know, academics typically take about 10, 15 years after you send something
[Unknown]: to come up with the answer.
[Guest]: But I think it's the big question in India today, you know, which is the social basis
[Guest]: for the dominance of the BJP.
[Guest]: And too many people who tend to portray Modi as just a fascist, you know, as just like,
[Guest]: you know, an event manager, they miss that this is the raw power of Hindu nationalism.
[Guest]: And I think, you know, maybe this is the next project that I focus on, which is to look
[Guest]: at the social basis of Hindu political unity as it were.
[Guest]: But at least for me, I mean, it's a bit early for me to sort of speak confidently.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough.
[Amit Varma]: I'll take this opportunity to book a session with you in advance for 2035.
[Amit Varma]: So when you have figured this out, kindly, kindly come on my show.
[Amit Varma]: And let us all know, let's now you know, after these little digressions, and we'll come back
[Amit Varma]: to this to discuss all of this in much more detail.
[Amit Varma]: I want to go back to your personal life, because it strikes me that, you know, the work one
[Amit Varma]: does is shaped by the training that one gets and the experiences one has.
[Amit Varma]: And that in turn, then, you know, the work one does shapes one as a person.
[Amit Varma]: So now you've done all these different things, you're first trained in law, then you go into
[Amit Varma]: journalism, then you go into political science and all of this.
[Amit Varma]: Then you write these books.
[Amit Varma]: What's been the impetus behind all of this?
[Amit Varma]: Like, have there been these big problems driving you or have you just moved on from interest
[Amit Varma]: to interest at different points in time when you've fallen in love with something else
[Amit Varma]: to do?
[Amit Varma]: Like, why did you become a journalist?
[Amit Varma]: Why did you then stop being a journalist?
[Amit Varma]: Give me a sense of that journey.
[Guest]: Oh, it's love and passion.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, it's not like logically done.
[Guest]: So for example, after this book, and already like it's not sales wise doing very, very
[Guest]: well, even though it's been only a week, there'll be tremendous pressure on me to write on like
[Guest]: Sonia Gandhi or something like that.
[Guest]: And look, if I don't have passion about it, or if I don't see a light at the end of the
[Guest]: tunnel, I just know because here's the thing, you know, when you when the book comes out,
[Guest]: you know, I keep telling my students also, you get all this publicity, you know, you
[Guest]: get to come on podcast show, but that's really like one month of fun for three years of like
[Guest]: really boring work.
[Guest]: So unless you're driven by passion, you know, for the subject itself, you can't sustain
[Guest]: yourself and also, I mean, readers come to know, you know, they come to know very quickly
[Unknown]: whether you're trying to sell them a lemon, or you're actually passionate about a subject,
[Unknown]: you know, and even if people disagree, they realize that you're genuinely motivated, they
[Guest]: can't read us again, and readers can sense this very well, you know.
[Guest]: So I've always, I mean, at least the way I've seen myself is that if I like an idea, I try
[Guest]: to do it.
[Guest]: For example, you know, given my academic career, you know, the logical pressure should be I
[Guest]: should, you know, publish in obscure journals, you know, I should that kind of thing.
[Guest]: But if it doesn't give me happiness, I find I'm not very good at it.
[Guest]: So I might as well do something I'm passionate about, because I can sustain myself and I'm
[Guest]: good at it.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: I think, you know, I went into National Law School Bangalore, because, you know, frankly,
[Guest]: after my 12th standard, I didn't, you know, the first question from middle class background
[Guest]: is, do you want to be an engineer?
[Unknown]: Do you want to be a doctor?
[Unknown]: Right?
[Unknown]: And, you know, if you don't want to be any of this, you know, how about a chartered accountant,
[Guest]: right, give you a little bit of added flavor to your life.
[Guest]: And I didn't want to be any of this, right.
[Guest]: And then my dad, who was, you know, totally chilled out on the matter, he got the National
[Guest]: Law School Bangalore entrance test, and it had a lot of GK, you know, quiz questions.
[Guest]: And I always like quizzing and stuff like that.
[Guest]: I said, Look, if the entrance test is any judge, this is what I want to do, you know,
[Guest]: so I did it.
[Guest]: But I always thought of it as a good undergraduate degree, and I was kind of a refuge from, you
[Guest]: know, being forced to become an engineer in some sense.
[Guest]: And the benefit of National Law School Bangalore is that by the time I joined it, thanks to
[Guest]: liberalization, etc, there were these fancy corporate law jobs, which at that time were
[Guest]: giving something like a lakh a month at that time, right, or maybe a little less.
[Guest]: And so that gave me confidence that look, even if I fool around with this that I don't
[Unknown]: want to do, I'll, you know, maybe I won't get a great corporate law job, maybe I won't
[Guest]: be unhappy, but it gives a sense of security, right.
[Guest]: And these kinds of security is very important when you want to, you know, pick especially
[Guest]: in India.
[Guest]: So I finished law, and I've done quite a few internships when I was in National Law School
[Guest]: Bangalore.
[Guest]: And, I mean, I'd gone to court and all and I'd worked, I'd done a corporate law internship,
[Guest]: I'd done an education internship, then none of it really excited me, you know, and I think
[Unknown]: I must really thank my parents that, you know, that, you know, when relatives or friends
[Guest]: would ask, what do you want to do?
[Guest]: And I didn't have an answer, it did not make my parents anxious, you know, they just let
[Unknown]: me kind of breathe.
[Guest]: But the one thing that law taught me, I mean, was the focus on getting facts and sequence
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: For example, you just pointed out, you know, the way I asked the question, who killed Mahatma
[Unknown]: Gandhi?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Now, it's like, my legal training has hugely helped that, which is to look at the judgments,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: To make an assessment of the difference between Hindu Mahasabha and RSS, right?
[Guest]: And Savarkar, because that's a separate question, right?
[Guest]: And look at the various, you know, forum in which Savarkar was judged, right, including
[Guest]: in 1966, much after his death, etc, etc.
[Guest]: That is definitely my legal training, you know, and I'm proud that both this book and
[Guest]: the Naseem Arao book is broadly bulletproof, in that you can't, you know, that no, I'm
[Guest]: sure you have disagreements, Amit, about the book, but there aren't facts there that you
[Guest]: will, you know, easy bloopers, easy facts, all of that is the obsession with legal training.
[Guest]: And to give you an example, I mean, lots of people read drafts of this book, including
[Guest]: four or five of my close law friends.
[Guest]: And these are friends who charge like 60,000 rupees for an hour of reading, you know, that's
[Guest]: basically, so their eye is very, very good for detail, you know, and I would say I'm
[Guest]: a bad version of that, which is that I don't, you know, my value is not 60,000 rupees for
[Guest]: an hour of reading, but certainly an eye for the detail of the text, getting the facts
[Guest]: right, crossing the T's, dotting the I's, and look, you know, as controversial a topic
[Guest]: like this, Amit, it's very important, because ultimately, it's what builds credibility with
[Guest]: the reader, which is, to me, everything about writing a book, that I think my legal training
[Guest]: is very good.
[Guest]: I ran away from the law and etc, etc.
[Guest]: But if I could give my view to it, it's an obsession with facts, obsession with getting
[Guest]: it right, you know, an obsession with exercising judgment on facts that are not 100%, because
[Guest]: lawyers sometimes have to reconstruct a little bit based on a preponderance of evidence,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So I noticed that sensibility is very much a lawyer's sensibility.
[Guest]: That said, I hope Amit, you know, you can tell your listeners that I don't write like
[Guest]: a lawyer, I hope you can say that, that comes from my journalism, I spent a couple of years
[Guest]: working for Indian Express.
[Guest]: And I was editing a lot of people's work.
[Guest]: So that part of the book, which is that, you know, you open the book, and then I want you
[Guest]: to kind of not put the book down, that's my name, right.
[Guest]: And all of that comes from journalism, for sure.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, I mean, I will, in fact, tell my listeners that this is a wonderfully readable
[Amit Varma]: book.
[Amit Varma]: And indeed, you know, unputdownable for me, I did read it in sort of two stretches.
[Amit Varma]: My other question is that this book is also very interesting, because it's simultaneously
[Amit Varma]: a work of history and journalism, in the sense that it's covering a political movement that's
[Amit Varma]: been 100 years in the making.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, that political movement is at its peak now.
[Amit Varma]: And some of his protagonists are at their peak now, though, of course, it's, you know,
[Amit Varma]: it's a book about the BJP before Modi, but yet he does play a significant part, sort
[Amit Varma]: of towards the end of it.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you know, in terms of you've already spoken about how your legal training helped
[Amit Varma]: you in the work that you did, and in the rigor that that gave you, now give me a sense of
[Amit Varma]: how you went about doing this book and how journalistic rigor and academic rigor came
[Amit Varma]: together.
[Amit Varma]: And what is, you know, in your process of writing the book, how different was it from
[Amit Varma]: how a pure journalist would approach it or a pure academic would approach it, though
[Amit Varma]: one could argue that in these days, neither of them can be pure, but you get what I'm
[Guest]: saying?
[Guest]: Yeah, no.
[Guest]: So let me first begin by saying that, I think journalism really taught me two things, which
[Guest]: has helped me in this book and the previous one.
[Guest]: The first thing Amit is that it taught me to, it really taught me that the story is
[Guest]: more important than you are, right, or that story is more important than I am.
[Guest]: And this is something that academics don't get, that the reality is not created in their
[Guest]: mind, in their university, in their ivory tower, there is a reality out there and, you
[Guest]: know, we have a variety of tools to try to understand that reality, make sense of that.
[Guest]: We have to be very humble, very, very humble about that.
[Guest]: And so I told myself that, look, if I'm writing a book on a BJP, my view on the BJP is irrelevant,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And frankly, it's irrelevant to the reader, that's not why the reader is paying this money
[Guest]: and reading the book.
[Guest]: And that the phenomena is bigger than I am.
[Guest]: So to give you a very simple manifestation of that, the only person who has a bigger
[Guest]: ego than a source is the secretary of the source.
[Guest]: And you know, we use a little bit of power, but we'll kind of make you know, and if you're
[Guest]: the kind of person who bristles at that, you know, who doesn't like the fact that some
[Guest]: junior functionary is making you wait for like two and a half hours, you know, in a
[Guest]: smelly empty room, then you shouldn't be in this business.
[Guest]: And I learned that from journalism a lot, you know, I also learned Amit, because when
[Guest]: I worked for Indian Express, Shekhar Gupta was the editor-in-chief.
[Guest]: And I'm sure many of your listeners see Cut the Clutter, which is his iconic show right
[Guest]: now.
[Guest]: But he used to do that with us, we were all junior journalists there, and he used to kind
[Guest]: of just walk into the newsroom and tell us story after story after story, you know.
[Guest]: And I think that really taught me that, look, there is a way in which you can tell deeper
[Guest]: truths about Indian politics through an anecdotal story style.
[Guest]: And he really taught me the importance of having a worm's eye view, you know, that he
[Guest]: was in the room when Charan Singh was doing X, that kind of thing.
[Guest]: And of course, it doesn't tell you much, but it also tells you a lot of things.
[Guest]: In contrast to academia, it's very refreshing, it gives a freshness to it.
[Guest]: And it gives a sense that, you know, something that you asked Amit right in the beginning
[Guest]: that the moment matters, that in any given moment, you know, what will happen next is
[Guest]: not fated.
[Guest]: Sab likha hua nahi hai, you know, and he really, a story is really that, right, that A happened
[Guest]: and B happened and C happened, and A and B and C need not follow chronologically.
[Guest]: If they did, then it's not a story, you know.
[Guest]: So I think both that, I think Express and journalism taught me to respect that the story
[Guest]: is bigger than you and your prejudices, and the reader frankly doesn't care about me,
[Guest]: you know, who am I?
[Guest]: And that's why in the main body of the book, I don't use the word I at all.
[Unknown]: I don't, you know, and I know that, like, lots of people are taught to do this nowadays.
[Guest]: And I realized that then you're just writing for five of your friends, you know, then just
[Guest]: send a private email, what are you writing a book for?
[Guest]: So I think it's, and looking back, I just, when I teach, I keep pushing this on my students
[Guest]: that, look, it's a hard thing to tell people, right?
[Guest]: You are irrelevant, your story is relevant.
[Guest]: And the second thing is, I think Shekhar Gupta taught me that to see politics like a worm,
[Guest]: you know, from the ground level.
[Guest]: And that mattered hugely to me, right?
[Guest]: That said, I think, journalists tend to be very bad readers of text.
[Guest]: So they're very good interviewers.
[Guest]: But you know, when it comes to archives, when it comes to looking at text, when it comes
[Guest]: to even reading newspapers, one of the things I do in this book is from the late 19th century
[Guest]: itself, I refer to a lot of newspapers, journalists don't typically do that very well.
[Guest]: And two is, I mean, I think journalists have a phobia from structural explanations.
[Guest]: For them, everything is, you know, it goes the other extreme, everything is about like
[Guest]: the person, you know, like, it's all about Vajpayee, or it's all about Advani, right?
[Guest]: Or it's all about the particular head of the RSS at that time, rather than these boundaries,
[Guest]: structural forces that also matter.
[Unknown]: So I think academia has definitely taught me that.
[Guest]: And I studied at Princeton University, which is, I would say one of the most boring places
[Guest]: on earth.
[Guest]: And looking back, you know, it's not a party town, at least for graduate students, it's
[Guest]: really boring.
[Guest]: It's like, not very close to a big city also, maybe New York is about an hour and a half
[Guest]: away, two hours away.
[Guest]: But what Princeton really taught me is that you got to take like academia, not as a as
[Guest]: a social event, but like as a professional thing.
[Guest]: I think some people I know, coming to academia, because you know, they can wear like nice
[Guest]: kurtas and they can wear it, you know, it's a, it's an act of being, right?
[Guest]: Why would you want to kind of wear a tie and sell soap somewhere you should.
[Guest]: And Princeton just drove that out of me, that it's a brutal place like you have, like academia
[Guest]: is about producing, it's about writing books, it's about writing articles, it's about going
[Guest]: to the archives, it's about creating data in a thoroughly unromantic way, you know,
[Guest]: so it totally took out the romance from from academia.
[Guest]: And I would say that, on balance, it's a very good thing, you know, because this kind of
[Unknown]: stuff is hard work, and if you don't have the appetite for that, then you end up making
[Amit Varma]: mistakes.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, I love your book, not only for his fluid prose, but also for what you just said
[Amit Varma]: that I couldn't make out where you stood on any of the issues.
[Amit Varma]: And I didn't really care.
[Amit Varma]: Because the story was sort of riveting enough to keep me going.
[Amit Varma]: Now, before we actually get to the book, one sort of final question, which sort of intrigues
[Amit Varma]: me because knowledge management is also something that I think about a fair bit, which is that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, do you have specific systems of knowledge management?
[Amit Varma]: Because you're doing a lot of archival work, you're, you know, you're digging up a lot
[Amit Varma]: of old sources as academics would at the same time, you're interviewing many people and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, so how do you organize all of that material?
[Amit Varma]: When does narrative sort of start to take shape?
[Amit Varma]: How do you avoid the danger, which you clearly have of having a preset narrative in your
[Guest]: head and then just finding the stuff that fits that?
[Guest]: You know, these are questions that I obsess about endlessly, because the process creates
[Guest]: the product.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, there are very few mistakes in this book, because I created a process,
[Guest]: what you call knowledge management.
[Guest]: And there's no shortcut to that.
[Unknown]: There's just no, it's not that it, you know, this, I think, Arundhati Roy said that, you
[Guest]: know, when she began writing God of Small Things, she kind of began and then she ended,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: I don't think that works for most people.
[Guest]: I go over, I see mistakes, so you create a process.
[Guest]: For me, looking back, I mean, you know, when it happened, it happened intuitively, I would
[Guest]: divide my knowledge management process into three phases.
[Guest]: The first phase is that I had this idea, right?
[Unknown]: And I began reading a lot around it, keeping an open mind, but reading what others have
[Unknown]: written about it.
[Guest]: So, for example, after the Nassim Rao book, you know, I said, maybe I should think about
[Guest]: Vajpayee.
[Guest]: And then I said, look, if you work on Vajpayee, I very quickly realized that Vajpayee and
[Guest]: Advani were two sides of the same coin.
[Guest]: So I was open enough that, okay, I was initially interested in Vajpayee, and initially I bought
[Guest]: this idea that Vajpayee was this grand figure, right?
[Guest]: Which, look, he is, but I just, you know, the book, as you've read, is also critical
[Guest]: of him.
[Unknown]: You know, it's not...
[Unknown]: So while he is this grand figure, he's a man who's highly complex, he has a lot of contradictions
[Guest]: within him.
[Unknown]: So I'm glad I did that, which is I very quickly realized that it's actually a Jugalbandi story
[Guest]: of Vajpayee and Advani.
[Guest]: And then I realized, Amit, that unlike in the case of Nassim Rao, who I think was single-handedly
[Unknown]: responsible for liberalization, Vajpayee and Advani's relationship cannot be understood
[Guest]: without the context, which is the movement, which is Hindu nationalism.
[Guest]: And the rise of Vajpayee and Advani mirrors the rise of Hindu nationalism, so then that's
[Guest]: what became the structure of the book.
[Guest]: But that was in my first phase of research where I'm kind of thinking about the idea
[Guest]: and I'm reading and constantly modifying what this original idea should be.
[Guest]: So while teaching, for example, Amit, I taught three courses at Ashoka University that had
[Guest]: to do with parts of this, of Hindu nationalism, so that at least I could read what other people
[Guest]: had written about it.
[Guest]: That took, I would say, about a year or about seven, eight months, where I'm just talking,
[Guest]: I'm meeting for lunch, many of the people who have come on your podcast, like Pratap
[Guest]: Bhanu Mehta, for example, and I'm just shooting the breeze, you know, I'm like thinking about
[Guest]: it and you know, when you're thinking about academic questions, you're both asking, is
[Guest]: it a serious question?
[Guest]: Is it a fun question?
[Guest]: And is it a doable question?
[Guest]: The doable is really important.
[Guest]: I mean, I have like the best research question, but I may not have sources, nobody may be
[Guest]: willing to open up.
[Unknown]: Archives may be not there, in which case you should abandon the question, right?
[Guest]: So I spent about a year.
[Guest]: And at the end of that, Amit, I did something that I learned for the Nassim Mara book.
[Guest]: I wrote a draft table of contents for the book.
[Guest]: I said, look, it'll be 300 pages, each chapter will be 30 pages, and I wrote it.
[Guest]: Now, this sounds absurd, right?
[Guest]: But what it did is immediately from this abstract idea, the book became like a physical thing.
[Guest]: And I said, look, ultimately, I have a physical thing.
[Guest]: Ultimately, it has to be 30 pages.
[Guest]: And I remember, you know, somebody telling me this when I was doing my PhD, that, you
[Guest]: know, the biggest advice he gave was think in chapters, which is a nice advice, because
[Guest]: otherwise you have the romance of an idea without how do you actually execute it, right?
[Guest]: Now, the key here, Amit, is something that you pointed out, which is that you shouldn't
[Guest]: be too wedded to your initial ideas.
[Guest]: So while I wrote this table of contents, which is like a rough structure of what the book
[Guest]: is going to look like, I was very comfortable that the moment I found more evidence, I should
[Guest]: change chapters, remove them, etc, etc, right?
[Guest]: Now, having done that, Amit, what I did was that I went to the second phase, which is
[Guest]: I would call research, which is I started both reading secondary material, which is
[Guest]: books and articles written by others, and fitting them into these chapters.
[Guest]: So I used to have separate Word documents for each chapter.
[Guest]: And then I have Word documents for sections within each chapter.
[Guest]: Now, why this is helpful, Amit, is two ways.
[Guest]: One is that when you're going to the archive, you're looking for something, right?
[Guest]: Otherwise, you know, you see, you know, you see, like, you know, 6000 pages, you don't
[Guest]: know which needle to look in the haystack, right?
[Guest]: So you go in with a hypothesis.
[Unknown]: And second is that when I'm reading something, I'm immediately being productive and say,
[Guest]: okay, you know, this has come in this chapter, or this is going to come in this space, which
[Guest]: is quite, you know, so it saves a lot of time.
[Guest]: Otherwise, I realized, Amit, from the time I was doing my PhD, that because research
[Guest]: tends to be open ended, you could spend 50% of your time researching on something that
[Guest]: is only 10% of the book.
[Guest]: And some of that quote, unquote, wastage is inevitable.
[Unknown]: That's what happens.
[Unknown]: You have to go down some blind alleys when you're doing research.
[Guest]: But you should avoid going down too many blind alleys, right?
[Guest]: That said, the biggest problem of this approach is that you may end up with a predetermined
[Guest]: outcome.
[Guest]: So you know, to use the popular phrase, when it comes to writing, you should be happy to
[Guest]: kill your babies.
[Guest]: The moment you realize, you know, you may have this great idea, you may have spent a
[Guest]: month kind of telling yourself, yeah, this is how the BJP work.
[Guest]: But if an evidence points otherwise, you have to say, I'm sorry, I was wrong, you know.
[Unknown]: And if you don't do that, then the reader is able to smell very quickly is your opinions
[Guest]: and conclusions driven from the evidence you provide, or are you trying to sell me something
[Guest]: and in this age amid the post fact world, everybody is using facts to actually sell
[Guest]: an agenda.
[Guest]: And I think readers are totally inured from it, very irritated with it.
[Guest]: So I was very, very sensitive that the moment the evidence or somebody told me something,
[Guest]: some archive, some newspaper gave me a slightly different view, I should present it like to
[Unknown]: give you one example.
[Unknown]: You know, I came in with the standard view that, you know, Vajpayee the moderate, Advani
[Unknown]: the hardliner.
[Guest]: And I very quickly realized that Advani's background is exceedingly complex.
[Guest]: He's like most of the listeners of this podcast, a Macaulay Putra, somebody who speaks English
[Guest]: as the first language.
[Guest]: He grew up to enormous wealth in Karachi, his family had a game room, huge house, they
[Guest]: had a Victoria horse driven carriage, you know, he was playing tennis when someone told
[Guest]: him about the RSS, who joins the RSS after a tennis game.
[Unknown]: And he wouldn't have joined RSS had it not been for the looming catastrophe of partition,
[Guest]: which splits his hometown and makes his rich family near poverty, enter near poverty.
[Guest]: So immediately when I realized that, I realized that I had to change this original idea of
[Guest]: a classic jugalbandhi between a moderate and a hardliner, because it was much more complex.
[Guest]: So that's again, I think something where journalism has helped me saying that you can't be wedded
[Guest]: to your own ideas.
[Guest]: If this is the famous John Maynard Keynes line, when the facts change, I change my mind,
[Guest]: what do you do, sir?
[Guest]: So that's the second stage, Amit, which is research.
[Guest]: And then what I have learned to do is to start writing quicker rather than later.
[Guest]: Because there is this sense I realized that perfection is the enemy of production.
[Guest]: And a lot of academics and researchers are saying that, look, I have to now read four
[Guest]: more books before I start writing, or I have to look at interview three more people before
[Guest]: I start writing.
[Guest]: That will never happen.
[Guest]: You'll spend your whole life trying to do this, this mythic sense of completion.
[Guest]: So what I learned was that, and my brother who's an MBA, he works for an FMCG, he's a
[Guest]: big influence on my life, and he's extremely focused on delivery.
[Guest]: And he's saying, look, write the chapter, he told me, and whatever you haven't done
[Guest]: research, leave it blank.
[Unknown]: So that when you go for your second round of research, you're only looking to fill in
[Guest]: the blank.
[Unknown]: And I found that a very, very helpful technique, because right with the material you have,
[Unknown]: let's say it's about 70% of the material that you should have.
[Guest]: But you know, to use consultancy speak, ring fence the problem.
[Guest]: So right there, the paragraphs which are hollow, and then do a second round of research, because
[Guest]: once you have written, you can see the holes in the chapter.
[Guest]: And when you do that, it may change even more.
[Guest]: So I would broadly say that, you know, when you said knowledge management, these are the
[Guest]: three different phases, and at least so far, it's helped me in good stead.
[Guest]: But you know, in some cases, I have made mistakes, so hopefully the next book will be a refinement
[Guest]: of this process.
[Amit Varma]: No, that's a fantastic quote about perfection being the enemy of production.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I teach a writing course, where I constantly sort of tell my students that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, for anything you do in life, there are these two imperatives, getting it done
[Amit Varma]: and getting it right.
[Amit Varma]: And your first priority has to be to get it done.
[Amit Varma]: And once you get it done, then you edit, edit, edit, then you chisel it down and get it right.
[Amit Varma]: And very often just getting it done, the process of iteration and reiteration will get it right,
[Amit Varma]: but that's the only way to do it.
[Amit Varma]: So that strikes a chord with me.
[Amit Varma]: My last sort of question about your working methods before we get to the book itself is,
[Amit Varma]: what is the process like of then getting people to talk to you about this period of time and
[Amit Varma]: some of whom I presume are people who would even in the current day be fairly important?
[Amit Varma]: You know, how do you get access? how do you get their trust?
[Amit Varma]: And then is there a sort of this psychological pressure that these people who have trusted
[Amit Varma]: you and been so nice to you, you have to make them look good also?
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, how does that whole process sort of work?
[Guest]: There's no psychological pressure on me to make them look good, because their narrative
[Guest]: has already made them look good.
[Guest]: You know, everyone in their story is the hero or heroine of their own story.
[Guest]: Some people do it obviously, some people aren't even aware that they're doing it, you know.
[Guest]: So this is like, you have to deal with this and it's hard.
[Unknown]: But you know, it's a hard question, because there's no simple answer to it.
[Guest]: If it was simple answer, then, you know, anybody could see this podcast and become the world's
[Guest]: best journalist.
[Guest]: And I'm not a good journalist, but my two years in journalism made me look at the best
[Guest]: and look at how they try to answer this question, right?
[Guest]: Like, how do you cultivate a source?
[Guest]: How do you make people trust you?
[Guest]: Because in India, especially, there's no shortage of people who want to speak.
[Guest]: Everybody has a story.
[Guest]: Everybody wants to give gyaan.
[Guest]: The issue is, do they trust you?
[Guest]: That's the issue.
[Guest]: And luckily for me, my first book, I had again interviewed a ton of people, and I was very
[Guest]: careful about it.
[Guest]: In that I sent out emails to everybody after, you know, just before the book was coming,
[Guest]: saying, look, this is the paragraph you have been quoted.
[Guest]: So not only did I ask their permission for their quotes, I gave them the two sentences
[Guest]: above and two sentences below, right?
[Guest]: And I think that, you know, this is, you know, from whether it's Prime Minister Manmohan
[Guest]: Singh, or it's like the doctor of Narsimha Rao, I use the same rule.
[Guest]: I didn't change that.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And I realized that that brings credibility, that people realize that look, speak, I don't
[Guest]: record.
[Guest]: So I write down.
[Guest]: So I have nothing to hold on.
[Guest]: So, you know, later on, if they deny, I'm screwed, right?
[Guest]: They know that, that helps build trust.
[Guest]: And so when really their consent happens, when I send them an email later, and they
[Guest]: say, yes, quote ABC and don't quote X, Y, Z.
[Guest]: And this happens all the time.
[Guest]: I mean, and also people speak very freely, but seven, eight months later, when I'm actually
[Guest]: sending them big quotes, things, their life circumstances have changed, and suddenly they
[Guest]: develop cold feet.
[Unknown]: And I think one of the things I regret in the book is the number of names I could tell
[Guest]: you would add even more credibility to the book, you know, like, it would blow your mind
[Guest]: up.
[Guest]: But I just, and you know, I'm just, I'm just bursting to tell you that, you know, you know,
[Unknown]: there are already, there are maybe about less, a little less than a hundred names that are
[Guest]: quoted, but the hundred names that are not quoted, maybe even more like, you know, juicy,
[Guest]: but I just can't do it.
[Guest]: You know, if I do it, nobody will talk to me for my third book, nobody.
[Guest]: And the other thing I've noticed that happens is that if you don't know somebody, so definitely
[Guest]: my previous book added to the credibility that, look, I'm not looking for a gotcha moment,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: I'm not looking to trap you.
[Guest]: And then you'll come in the newspaper, that kind of thing.
[Guest]: But equally in India, somebody has to vouch for you.
[Guest]: Somebody has to.
[Guest]: So, you know, I meet an older person or something like that, who may not have heard of my, the
[Guest]: previous book, somebody who they trust has to trust me.
[Guest]: That's the only way they do it.
[Guest]: Otherwise, yeah, maybe it's just an Indian trade, because that's in some sense, the heart
[Guest]: of my book that Indians lack teamwork and the BJP does it well, that everybody's suspicious
[Guest]: if somebody, you know, of somebody just coming and asking you questions.
[Guest]: I mean, look at how rudely Indians treat salesmen, Eureka salesmen who ring your bell, right?
[Guest]: And come to try to sell you something on your door.
[Unknown]: We don't like it.
[Guest]: We don't like strangers.
[Guest]: So, you have to have somebody to vouch for you.
[Guest]: And then the third thing I realized, I mean, is that you have to come for an interview
[Guest]: well prepared.
[Guest]: You know, you can't use the source or the interviewer for the basic material, right?
[Guest]: That's important.
[Guest]: Then people begin to respect you.
[Guest]: They said, okay, he's come prepared, you know.
[Guest]: So I would say, you know, these were some of the skills I use, but I don't, there's
[Guest]: no formula for this.
[Guest]: It's the same question I'm asking in any relationship with your spouse, with your friends, with
[Guest]: your parents.
[Guest]: How do you build trust?
[Guest]: And frankly, for me, 50% is building trust with the source and 50% is building trust
[Guest]: with the leader.
[Unknown]: And it's actually the same thing, which is that, you know, everybody realizes that you
[Unknown]: have an angle.
[Unknown]: Everybody realizes that you come in with biases, but be honest about it, come well prepared
[Guest]: and don't try to take advantage of somebody's being nice or trusting you.
[Unknown]: And then in India, that is such a deficit that even if you do a little of it, then,
[Unknown]: you know, people, they want to tell you everything about your life and I actually want to leave
[Guest]: for lunch, you know, so, but there's no formula for that.
[Amit Varma]: And definitely that comes from my journalism, right?
[Amit Varma]: Also the other thing that I sort of wanted to ask you was that comes to mind is that
[Amit Varma]: you've mentioned about how, you know, perfection is the enemy of production.
[Amit Varma]: So obviously your first impulse is to get it done, you know, to get it out on paper.
[Amit Varma]: What's your process like after you have a first draft done?
[Amit Varma]: Like one thing you mentioned is you've got paragraphs and you've got holes in them, or
[Amit Varma]: you know, within a chapter, you've got holes, you know that, okay, that's where I need to
[Amit Varma]: go back and get the research done.
[Amit Varma]: But once you have all the material and you've gotten that first draft, what's the process
[Amit Varma]: of editing like?
[Amit Varma]: Do you ever end up restructuring the book itself, or the chapters themselves in significant
[Amit Varma]: ways?
[Amit Varma]: How much time do they take vis-a-vis one another?
[Guest]: You know, Amit, I spend a lot of time thinking about the editing process because, you know,
[Guest]: my wife teaches creative writing, exactly what you do, and she's drilled into me that
[Guest]: look, the first draft is actually quite liberating because it's going to look nothing like the
[Guest]: final draft.
[Guest]: So don't worry about putting something on paper because have the confidence that it's
[Guest]: only draft number 18 that is going to go.
[Guest]: And there's a huge difference between draft one and draft 18.
[Guest]: So that's actually quite liberating, right?
[Guest]: Because otherwise, you're worried that if you put something on paper, it has to be perfect.
[Guest]: It doesn't.
[Guest]: And I've really learned a lot from that idea of hers.
[Guest]: And it's like, I, you know, I write and look, when I think I may not, you know, you don't
[Unknown]: begin at the beginning, right?
[Unknown]: The human mind is not, doesn't begin a story at the beginning, you typically begin the
[Unknown]: story in the middle.
[Guest]: And so I write it and then only later I find out what should be the first paragraph that
[Guest]: kind of draws the reader in.
[Guest]: I'm sure you've done exactly this when you were in Cricinfo, Amit, that you have to edit
[Guest]: other people's work.
[Guest]: The material is there, but you want to kind of make the bread rise just a little bit.
[Unknown]: And that's your job as an editor.
[Unknown]: And I think in Express, I wasn't just a journalist, I was also like a copy editor, where I was
[Guest]: editing other people's op-ed page submissions.
[Guest]: So I should change the voice of that person.
[Guest]: But how do I kind of have a better beginning, have a better end, right?
[Guest]: George Orwell has been a huge influence on me of this.
[Guest]: He has a, I think, Politics in the English Language, an extraordinary essay where he
[Guest]: tells you what to avoid, which is don't use a word if it's not required, right?
[Guest]: Make sure that every sentence follows from the previous one.
[Guest]: And another one of my writing gurus has been V.S. Naipaul.
[Guest]: And if you look at, forget his politics for just a second, but he's one of the great stylists
[Guest]: of prose in the 20th century.
[Guest]: He used to write very short sentences, and each sentence, he made sure that every sentence
[Guest]: had a next sentence that followed from that.
[Guest]: And if you remove that sentence, the paragraph would fall.
[Unknown]: That was the test, right?
[Unknown]: That if you have a sentence there, that maybe you can remove that sentence and it will still
[Guest]: sort of tell the reader the same thing, then you should remove it.
[Guest]: And that's what makes it kind of sparse and it forces you to, because what is the leader
[Unknown]: getting in return?
[Guest]: The leader is getting in return the confidence that every word the leader is being forced
[Unknown]: to read has been worth it.
[Unknown]: And the writer has spent a lot of energy not sending the reader down random rabbit holes.
[Guest]: I'm not a very good writer, in a sense, I'm not a natural writer, so I'm a bit of a defensive
[Guest]: writer.
[Guest]: So what I try to do is use writing as a very light scaffolding so that I can tell the story.
[Guest]: I also know that about myself, that look, I'm not like the world's best prose stylist.
[Guest]: So I'm defensive, I use short sentences, I use active voice.
[Guest]: That's another thing that George Orwell stressed on, you know, and as far as possible, if there's
[Guest]: any meat, like I try to avoid starters and on three and that kind of stuff.
[Guest]: I give you the main course, right, in every sentence.
[Guest]: And in other words, the sentence must be saying something.
[Guest]: The other thing on editing I've learned a lot from BS Naipaul is that every sentence
[Guest]: must be capable of a couple of meanings, right?
[Guest]: That's the power of a sentence.
[Guest]: You know, I'll give you one example, I mean, which is that you must have noticed that the
[Guest]: book begins with an organization, a story of like an event that is being organized,
[Guest]: which is the 1995 November, BJP national executive in Bombay, in Shivaji Park, etc, etc, right?
[Guest]: And Mahalakshmi racecourse.
[Guest]: And I spent time on the logistics, you know, that they were, you know, 10,000 people to
[Guest]: be fed, these many people were coming by boat, you know, I do that through the book, right?
[Guest]: But what I'm trying to do is give you the flavor of a movement that is obsessed with
[Guest]: this stuff without ever saying it, right?
[Guest]: Of course, I begin the story with Vajpayee Advani and Advani announcing Vajpayee's Prime
[Guest]: Minister, but I deliberately spend a lot of time telling you, for example, you know, I'm
[Guest]: just opening the book here.
[Unknown]: And, you know, to give you this particular detail, which is that over 120,000 delegates
[Guest]: attended, this is the November 1995 event, BJP event in Bombay, some even by ship from
[Guest]: the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, right?
[Guest]: So this sentence has two meanings.
[Guest]: One is, of course, it's a fun fact.
[Guest]: But the deeper point I'm taking is that these guys win because they're obsessed with this
[Guest]: sort of organization.
[Guest]: If I was writing a book on the Congress, I would not have this sentence.
[Guest]: Congress also does organization, Congress also has events, right?
[Guest]: People do come from Andaman, Nicobar Islands, but it's not central to the self, you know,
[Guest]: the self-knowledge and the self-impression that the Congress has of itself.
[Guest]: So that's what I mean that, you know, like a lot of sentences, if you play it right,
[Guest]: you're saying something, but you're also telling them something deeper.
[Guest]: And that only comes through editing.
[Guest]: It only comes through like, you know, going through multiple drafts.
[Unknown]: The other thing I've learned, Amit, again, this is thanks to my wife, is that I try to
[Guest]: avoid cliches.
[Guest]: So for example, I try to avoid saying it was a watershed moment, because a watershed actually
[Guest]: is a certain visual where, you know, the river comes from the mountain and at some point
[Amit Varma]: it hits a plane, and at the watershed, the river can go in multiple directions.
[Guest]: So the technical use of watershed is an event, right, that can go in multiple directions,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Whereas we use watershed today to mean an important event.
[Guest]: That's not what it means.
[Guest]: So if, but because it has become an overused cliche, then we keep using it without thinking.
[Guest]: So the other thing I've learned is when I detect a cliche, I remove it.
[Guest]: And I try to look for a synonym, or I like to look for another thing that communicates
[Unknown]: it.
[Guest]: And, you know, there's all these thesauruses and dictionaries online.
[Guest]: So life is quite easy.
[Guest]: But none of this is conceivable in the first draft, this actually happens in the 8, 9,
[Guest]: 10 draft.
[Guest]: And my only hope is that the reader realizes that all this effort is to make her happy,
[Guest]: you know, and, and that to me, I'm very clear that, you know, I have one boss in this book,
[Guest]: and that's the reader.
[Amit Varma]: No, I mean, everything that you said strikes such a chord that all my writing students
[Amit Varma]: and listeners of this podcast will be wondering if I sat down in advance and all of this,
[Amit Varma]: but then, you know, as you said, your wife is a writing teacher, for example, you know,
[Amit Varma]: when I used to be an editor in Pragati and elsewhere, whenever someone new would write
[Amit Varma]: for me, I'd first make them read politics in the English language.
[Unknown]: It's just a seminal.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's not fixed at all.
[Amit Varma]: And Orwell's essays, in fact, you know, what I consistently cite as my desert island book,
[Amit Varma]: it's a masterpiece.
[Amit Varma]: And it's an interesting bit of trivia for you, since you mentioned active voice.
[Amit Varma]: In his essay politics in the English language, Orwell warns against using passive voice twice.
[Amit Varma]: And one of those times he does it in passive voice.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, wow.
[Amit Varma]: I didn't know that.
[Amit Varma]: I did not know that.
[Amit Varma]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's just a moment of irony, which I, and even what, you know, what you said about
[Amit Varma]: cliches, the interesting thing about, and of course, cliches are bad, because they don't
[Amit Varma]: invoke a fresh image and the reader's eyes glaze over, but they can also be inaccurate.
[Amit Varma]: Like you said, watershed moment, and the cricketing example of that would be the ball sped to
[Amit Varma]: the boundary, like a tracer bullet.
[Amit Varma]: And if anyone's actually seen a tracer bullet, they don't go the way Ravi Shastri thinks
[Guest]: they go.
[Guest]: That's exactly right.
[Guest]: And what that does, Amit, is what you mentioned, that if you're trying to communicate something
[Guest]: using a fresh image, the reader's eye doesn't glaze over, the reader pauses to see, right?
[Guest]: And then the image has that double power, you know, so from a diluted image, you end
[Guest]: up with a very concentrated image, because the reader hasn't heard that before, right?
[Guest]: So you know, just what would you say, just as an exercise, that if the ball went very
[Guest]: fast to the boundary, what would be a fresh image that communicates exactly what the ball
[Guest]: did?
[Guest]: You know, because you're the cricket man.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, well, right now, I can't think of something offhand, because I'd actually have to see
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: I don't want to comment on a hypothetical ball.
[Amit Varma]: But the classic example I give is that sometimes an adjective in a particular context can be
[Amit Varma]: a cliche.
[Amit Varma]: For example, all cover drives will be described as elegant.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is that you can say that Virat Kohli played an elegant cover drive, or Rahul
[Amit Varma]: Rawat did, or Mark Waugh did.
[Amit Varma]: And the truth is, it's accurate, because all the cover drives are elegant.
[Amit Varma]: But it doesn't convey the particulars, they're very different from each other.
[Guest]: And that's a writer's job to get to the heart of the difference.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: In fact, I try as much as possible to avoid adjectives and adverbs.
[Guest]: You know, describe it, you know, don't say that he ran quickly, right?
[Guest]: Don't say that, you know, when he ran, the floor was creaking, or the floor made a lot
[Unknown]: of noise, something like that.
[Guest]: So I tried, again, this is all defensive writing, because, you know, if you're a great writer,
[Guest]: you don't need to be told all this, you have an intuitive rhythm, I know I don't.
[Unknown]: So I and again, when I in my first draft, and I'm sure it's the same with you Amit,
[Unknown]: we write like we talk.
[Guest]: So we use cliches, you know, when we speak, our first reaction is imprecise.
[Guest]: But in all the further edits, I move it further and further away from the original bad way
[Guest]: in which I try to communicate it.
[Guest]: So in that sense, it's a it is highly constructed, you know, that that sense of that sense of
[Guest]: sentences that I try at least to incorporate.
[Guest]: By the way, thanks for this Amit, because I obsess hugely about the writing process.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And it's very, very important for me that a book like this is read, you know, far beyond
[Guest]: the confines of, or even the people who see this podcast, we don't want a very small intelligent
[Guest]: subset of policymakers or people interested in policy.
[Guest]: So I wanted to be even broader, right.
[Guest]: And at least so far, we're able to do it that, you know, right now on Amazon, I'm competing
[Guest]: with like word power made easy and Dale Carnegie, right.
[Guest]: And to do that, especially for a topic that is this difficult, that you have to obsess
[Guest]: extra on the writing style.
[Amit Varma]: No question.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, that's especially important, because, you know, one thing again, my last
[Amit Varma]: compliment of your book, because I don't want to embarrass you, but, you know, Orwell once
[Amit Varma]: said good prose is like a windowpane, which means you should not notice it, it is just
[Amit Varma]: meant to show you what's on the other side.
[Amit Varma]: And that's one of the qualities of your book to being a writer myself, I actually noticed
[Amit Varma]: quite a few superb sentences, which you came up with, but in a writerly sense, they don't
[Amit Varma]: draw attention to themselves.
[Amit Varma]: But I noticed that maybe I'll get the chance to quote a couple of them as we go along.
[Amit Varma]: And the other thing that you said is also resonant with me, because one of the things
[Amit Varma]: that I sort of emphasize when I talk about writing is that, especially in India, the
[Amit Varma]: way we speak English, we've internalized a lot of bad habits.
[Amit Varma]: And the first task is to become mindful of them, and eliminate them.
[Amit Varma]: So in fact, one of the exercises I give my writing students is to write a specific piece,
[Amit Varma]: whatever the theme is, but without using adjectives or adverbs, which they complain about a lot
[Guest]: This is why EV Amit, I think we are on like a little, literally like 100% the same mind
[Guest]: on this.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Verbs are your best friend.
[Amit Varma]: On that note, we will take to, you know, give you an active voice sentence, we will take
[Unknown]: a commercial break now.
[Amit Varma]: As many of you know, I'll soon be coming out with a four volume anthology of the seen and
[Amit Varma]: the unseen books organized around the themes of politics, history, economics, and society
[Amit Varma]: and culture.
[Amit Varma]: These days, I'm wading through over 3 million words of conversation from all my episodes
[Amit Varma]: so far to curate the best bits.
[Amit Varma]: And for this to happen, I needed transcripts.
[Amit Varma]: And that was made possible by a remarkable young startup called Tapchief.
[Amit Varma]: Tapchief at tapchief.com is a digital platform that allows companies to outsource work to
[Amit Varma]: their network of freelancers.
[Amit Varma]: And Tapchief's network includes more than 125,000 people as of now.
[Amit Varma]: You want people to make your web page or design a logo or compose a jingle or do some digital
[Amit Varma]: marketing for you, Tapchief gives you an easy way to reach out to freelancers competing
[Amit Varma]: for your work.
[Amit Varma]: I can say from firsthand experience how valuable this has been for me and solve the problem
[Amit Varma]: I was actually a bit worried about.
[Amit Varma]: So do go over to tapchief.com and check out all that Tapchief has to offer.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe they could solve your problem too.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene and the unseen I'm chatting with Vinay Sitapati about his wonderful
[Amit Varma]: book Jugalbandi about the BJP before Narendra Modi and honestly tons of insight even on
[Amit Varma]: the current BJP all of which comes from the context that we get.
[Amit Varma]: So I kind of want to go to the context that you sort of set in the start of the book about
[Amit Varma]: Hindu nationalism and the Hindu movement itself, where you point out that what any nationalism
[Amit Varma]: has to contend with is thinking of people, territory, state, and you speak about how
[Amit Varma]: they were notions of Hindu territory from the Vishnu Purana onwards.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, as far as the Hindu people were concerned, there's no canonical book or institution.
[Amit Varma]: You just have a bunch of, you know, a plethora of cultural practices as you put it.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, of course, there are arguments about historians, whether there was an actual
[Amit Varma]: Hindu consciousness till our colonial overlords came and sort of spread that narrative.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you know, and the closest thing that came to a Hindu state was, of course, Shivaji's
[Amit Varma]: Maratha Kingdom.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I want to sort of go to 1906 and 1909.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the very interesting things that you point out, and again, it's an event in
[Amit Varma]: history that has massive consequences and has literally shaped our country even today,
[Amit Varma]: which is the British conception of the sort of elections that they would have in India.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, the demographic anxiety that they lead to among Hindus here, can you elaborate
[Amit Varma]: on that a bit?
[Guest]: So, Amit, you've asked two questions, right?
[Guest]: One is the debate on who is a Hindu, what is Hinduism, right?
[Guest]: And why this is a very tough question to answer.
[Guest]: The second question you asked is, what does elections do to that, right?
[Guest]: How does elections put unique pressure on trying to answer this question?
[Guest]: To come to the first one, Hinduism has 3,000 castes, as many sub-castes, so many different
[Guest]: languages and dialects, right?
[Guest]: So it has a lot of internal diversity, both theologically as well as in practice.
[Guest]: To add to that, it doesn't have a Quran, it doesn't have an authoritative textbook, and
[Guest]: this cannot be emphasized.
[Guest]: Some people say it's the Vedas, but the Lingayat community of Karnataka is an anti-Vedic movement,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: They are Hindu, right?
[Guest]: And it also doesn't have an authoritative institution, unlike the Vatican.
[Guest]: So therefore, a clear answer, an authoritative answer to the question, what is Hinduism or
[Guest]: who is a Hindu, is not available.
[Guest]: That's not available.
[Guest]: Nonetheless, I push back against, let's say, Marxist scholars who argue that therefore
[Guest]: there was no such Hinduism until British rule.
[Guest]: So they say that there is Christianity, there is Islam, but there is no such, that's not
[Guest]: true.
[Guest]: It's not true because A, a core part of Hinduism has been, as you mentioned, sacred geography,
[Guest]: the idea of a theersthan, which is the snowy mountains on the top and the oceans below,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and the Indus on one side, and that is there, it is recorded in the Vishnu Purana.
[Guest]: But even earlier, when you had Greek and Roman visitors to India, they very clearly had a
[Guest]: sense that on this side of the Indus lies a very particular civilization.
[Guest]: So one of the things is that while Indians don't have a group consciousness that we are
[Guest]: Hindu or we are Indian, any outsider was able to say that this is a distinctive civilization,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And even the word India comes from the word Indus in that sense.
[Guest]: So I push back against the idea that there is no such Hinduism.
[Guest]: But nonetheless, because of these factors of Hinduism, the lack of an authoritative
[Guest]: institution and the lack of a text, what is Hinduism or to put it differently, Hindu group
[Guest]: consciousness has been harder to identify, right?
[Guest]: That you are a Hindu, I am a Hindu, therefore, I should give you a job, right?
[Unknown]: Because that means answering the question, what is Hinduism to which there are multiple
[Guest]: answers, even though, you know, there is unity in diversity to articulate it by Hindus themselves
[Unknown]: have been very hard.
[Guest]: The first articulation of that happens by some scholars argue that it's the Vishnu
[Guest]: Puranas, right?
[Guest]: Around the 4th century AD where you have a recognized architecture of Hinduism with the
[Guest]: sects of Vishnu, Shiva and Devi being the sacred feminine, you know, Jai Mata Di, etc,
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: Others say it's really the advent of Muslim group, which, you know, created a Hindu consciousness
[Guest]: and a third group, the more Marxist group says it's British group, right?
[Guest]: But whichever side you buy, I am much more inclined, by the way, to buy the idea that
[Guest]: at least from the Vishnu Puranas, you have an architecture that resembles today's Hinduism,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So whichever argument you buy, it's pretty clear that by the late 19th century, you have
[Guest]: the quest for a Hindu identity thinkers like Vivekananda, Bhudev Mukhopadhyay, reform movements
[Guest]: like the Brahmo Samaj, Arya Samaj are obsessed with the question, what is Hinduism, right?
[Guest]: And I buy the argument that that is in some sense a response to British rule in India.
[Guest]: But what this idea of who is a Hindu, what is a Hindu doesn't have is an idea of a state.
[Guest]: So if you look at, you know, Bankim Chandra's famous book, which had Vande Mataram in it,
[Unknown]: he doesn't think of an alternative to British rule.
[Guest]: He is very happy with British rule at the end of it, right?
[Guest]: So there's no articulation of what a Hindu state looks like.
[Guest]: That begins to happen, as I argue, and that leads to the second question that you asked,
[Guest]: only when the British introduced elections, because the moment the British introduced
[Unknown]: elections in India, it's very limited, very halting, begins in the late 19th century,
[Guest]: but really, you know, with the Minto-Modi reforms of 1909, and the Montague-Chancellor
[Guest]: reforms of 1990, it's clear to all Indians that look, one day we will have universal
[Guest]: adult franchise, and one day the British should leave.
[Guest]: So that it's a slippery slope to parliamentary democracy.
[Guest]: This creates amid, and this is a core argument, and is the core original argument of this
[Guest]: book, panic among Indians, absolute panic, right?
[Guest]: The Muslim League is created out of the sense of panic, it was largely created by the rich
[Guest]: zamindars of United Provinces, what is today Uttar Pradesh, many of them were Muslim, right?
[Guest]: And they had already seen that limited elections in the late 19th century had reduced their
[Guest]: numbers to something closer to what their numerical strength was, which was 25% in pre-partition
[Guest]: India.
[Guest]: And they understood very clearly that once you get into this business of 1% 1 vote, you'll
[Guest]: end up with the word majority and minority.
[Guest]: Now, in India, the word majority and minority is every child knows the word, even if you
[Guest]: don't know English.
[Guest]: But we forget that that word exists only in the context of elections, otherwise, why does
[Guest]: numbers matter?
[Guest]: Elections and 1% 1 vote is the only principle where group size makes a difference in the
[Unknown]: kind of power you use, and today we take it for granted.
[Unknown]: In the early 20th century, it wasn't for granted, those were not the ways in which we thought
[Guest]: about power.
[Guest]: So the Muslim League is created with the specific intent of lobbying the British to reduce democracy
[Guest]: defined as 1% 1 vote, right?
[Guest]: They want parity between the 75% Hindus in India and the 20-25% Muslims, roughly.
[Guest]: They want parity, which would mean, as Savarkar correctly understood, that 3 Hindu votes is
[Guest]: equal to 1 Muslim vote, and they are successful because right in the beginning, when the British
[Guest]: begin to introduce this sort of elections, they have separate electorates for Muslims,
[Guest]: which is only Muslims vote for only Muslim leaders, right?
[Guest]: So the Hindu Mahasabha is created as a response to this, the first national Hindu party.
[Guest]: And their argument is, look, once you begin to do this, the voting power of a Hindu becomes
[Guest]: much reduced as a Hindu as an individual, which is why, and this is a core argument
[Guest]: of the book Amit, I argue that Hindu nationalism was very comfortable with elections.
[Unknown]: Why wouldn't they be?
[Unknown]: Because Hindus are a social majority in India, right?
[Guest]: So when you read or hear about the BJP even today, one of the incongruencies you see is
[Guest]: this is a party obsessed with creating a social majority, right?
[Guest]: At the same time, it is politically liberal, at least if you hear their words, right?
[Guest]: So for example, the idea that you should remove Article 370 and Kashmiris and the rest of
[Unknown]: India must have exactly the same rights is a form of political liberalism that every
[Guest]: Indian should have the same right.
[Guest]: But underpinning that idea is an idea that Hindus are a social majority, right?
[Guest]: That Indian Hindus have about 100 times as much voting power as the Muslim Kashmiri Indians,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And therefore equalization will help empower a Hindu social majority.
[Guest]: And the game, Amit, and I argue that that's also the game behind the creation of the RSS
[Guest]: is to make sure enough Hindus vote as one.
[Guest]: The 100-year project of the RSS, the Hindu Mahasabha, the Jansan, is to create a Hindu
[Guest]: vote bank.
[Guest]: And Narendra Modi is the apotheosis of that 100-year idea, which is created through elections.
[Unknown]: Why does this idea matter even today?
[Unknown]: The idea matters even today because too many critics of BJP, you know, say, oh, they're
[Unknown]: fascists.
[Guest]: And think about non-democratic means to get rid of them.
[Guest]: The only way to defeat Narendra Modi is on election day.
[Guest]: There's no other way to defeat him.
[Guest]: They are not fascists.
[Guest]: They are obsessed with elections.
[Guest]: They are constituted with elections.
[Guest]: In fact, a BJP leader offline, I'll tell you the person to add more credibility, unfortunately,
[Guest]: I can't tell you online, but let me put it this way.
[Guest]: Imagine the most important BJP leader who you think will say this is likely to be that
[Guest]: person.
[Guest]: Told me that, you know, I win elections in order to worship God, right?
[Guest]: So you worship God through winning elections.
[Guest]: And I, you know, the argument here is not that the BJP is a religious force in that
[Guest]: sense.
[Guest]: It's based on social identity, but that obsession with elections, like just now, Amit, while
[Guest]: we are recording this, the Hyderabad municipal elections are going on, municipal elections.
[Guest]: And you had Narendra Modi going there ostensibly to see some vaccine, but really to campaign
[Unknown]: for it.
[Guest]: Amit Shah has gone, Yogi Adityanath has gone.
[Guest]: And at the very same time, Rahul Gandhi and his mother are holidaying in Goa.
[Guest]: And I think his sister is holidaying in Himachal Pradesh.
[Guest]: I may be wrong on the facts a little bit, but roughly.
[Guest]: Why does the BJP do that?
[Guest]: Because elections constitutes that, but that's, I'm not giving them a free pass by saying
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: I'm just saying that, what do you think will happen if in a group based society where Indians,
[Guest]: every part of an Indian life is based on groups, you suddenly introduce a principle of one
[Guest]: person, one vote.
[Guest]: It's not that overnight Indians are going to become like Swiss citizens who vote on
[Guest]: the basis of interest.
[Guest]: Instead, the game is who is a Hindu, how do we redefine that, right?
[Guest]: And it's not just Hindu nationalists who are doing this, you have the creation of a Dravidian
[Unknown]: identity in Tamil Nadu, which is a majority identity, right?
[Unknown]: Kashi Ram understands that you can create an anti upper caste identity, which is the
[Guest]: Bahujan identity, which is about 80% of India.
[Guest]: So democracy in a group based society incentivizes politicians to constantly expand group size
[Guest]: to conjure up majorities so that they can win elections, right?
[Guest]: And in that sense, the BJP is a natural product of what you get when you introduce elections
[Guest]: in India.
[Amit Varma]: No, that's fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm going to sort of try to unpack that layer by layer.
[Amit Varma]: But first of all, you just gave us two examples of sentences that do two things that both
[Amit Varma]: tell and show, you know, when Narendra Modi going to a municipal election or Rahul Gandhi
[Amit Varma]: holidaying in Goa, both tell you a mundane fact, but also show you something, something
[Amit Varma]: larger within that.
[Guest]: But if I was writing this Amit, just to tell your listeners who are into writing, I would
[Amit Varma]: edit the gyaan, I would just tell you these facts, you know, and put it in a way, and
[Amit Varma]: the facts would speak for themselves, put it in a way in which the facts speak for them.
[Amit Varma]: But that happens only in draft number nine or 10.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you're intimidating everyone with all this talk of draft number nine or 10,
[Amit Varma]: or I'll get it right in draft 18 and all of that, to sort of go back to this narrative.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, another interesting thing that strikes me, and this is again, sort of how
[Amit Varma]: circumstances can shape history that, you know, in 1906, you have this talk of elections,
[Amit Varma]: and therefore, as a, you know, to protect their standing within the elites, a Muslim
[Amit Varma]: League is formed.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, in 1909, you have the Minto-Modli reforms, and, you know, suddenly Hindus realized
[Amit Varma]: three votes are going to be equal to one.
[Amit Varma]: And then you have various other things happening as a response to that, including the Hindu
[Amit Varma]: Massacre in 1915, with Lala Lajpatra and Mother Mohan Malviya, because, and they're a pressure
[Amit Varma]: group within the Congress to begin with.
[Amit Varma]: And then a number of interesting things happen, as you point out in the book, and you know,
[Amit Varma]: I've spoken about on previous episodes and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, it's one is a whole Khilafat movement, which really makes no cohesive sense,
[Amit Varma]: because, you know, one party to that, you know, the Ali brothers and all that are agitating
[Amit Varma]: for this larger Muslim Ummah and the other party Mahatma Gandhi is talking about an Indian
[Amit Varma]: state and the two don't sort of go together.
[Amit Varma]: And many people view that as appeasement or selling out or, you know, what the hell is
[Amit Varma]: the Congress doing?
[Amit Varma]: And eventually that drives the Mahasabha away from the Congress as well.
[Amit Varma]: And in the 20s, because of what is happening, because of this, what you call the demographic
[Amit Varma]: anxiety, you also have the different strands of Hindutva come together.
[Amit Varma]: You know, there is Savarkar and one could argue that, you know, if you look at Savarkar
[Amit Varma]: pre-imprisonment, he's actually always, he's never saying anything anti-Muslim, but then
[Amit Varma]: he's radicalized in his time in prison by the torture that he receives at the hands
[Amit Varma]: of Muslims who are sort of, you know, the Pathans and so on, who are, you know, carrying
[Amit Varma]: out the torture on the commands of the British and that kind of radicalizes him.
[Amit Varma]: So that's another interesting circumstance.
[Amit Varma]: But the two interesting things that happened in the 20s, obviously, is, you know, Savarkar
[Amit Varma]: writing Hindutva and then the formation of the RSS.
[Amit Varma]: And because both of them are sort of political and both of them, as you point out, are a
[Amit Varma]: response in part to this demographic anxiety, you know, both of them, therefore, tend to
[Amit Varma]: be inclusive.
[Amit Varma]: How do you build the largest political movement that you can?
[Amit Varma]: You bring everybody under one umbrella and you, you know, Savarkar, of course, besides
[Amit Varma]: being an atheist and a lover of beef was also a sort of, you know, against caste.
[Amit Varma]: And the RSS, you point out, was actually when you look at Hindu organizations, the RSS was
[Amit Varma]: fairly radical because they didn't care about caste either.
[Amit Varma]: They just wanted to bring everybody under the Hindu umbrella.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about this.
[Amit Varma]: And why does this, you know, impression persist among the elites today that the BJP is a casteist
[Amit Varma]: party when clearly, as you know, Prashant Jha wrote in How the BJP Wins, he quoted a
[Amit Varma]: Dalit scholar as saying that they are the Dalit party of India.
[Amit Varma]: They get more Dalit votes than everybody else.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, why does that impression persist?
[Amit Varma]: And tell me then a little bit about, you know, how the sort of the evolution of this sort
[Guest]: of thinking.
[Guest]: So, I mean, that's a good question, but that has a complex answer, right, which is the
[Guest]: question you're asking is that the relationship between Hindu nationalism and caste, and that's
[Guest]: a complex set of answers.
[Guest]: I think that the headline news for me, you know, which is something you just said, which
[Guest]: is that given that traditional Hinduism is so hierarchical, Hindu nationalism is the
[Guest]: most progressive element of traditional Hinduism when it comes to caste, right?
[Guest]: On the other hand, traditional Hinduism was very accommodating of multiple sects, multiple
[Guest]: religious practices, you know, the apocryphal stories of when Arab Muslim traders landed
[Guest]: in Kerala, local Muslims only helped build the mosque, right?
[Guest]: On the other hand, Hindu nationalism is much more exclusive and regressive when it comes
[Guest]: to religion.
[Guest]: So this is the, many of the critics of the BJP just don't understand this, that if it
[Guest]: was just in upper caste body, it would get 20% of the vote, you can't win.
[Guest]: So it is this mix of being a progressive force for Hindus, or let's say the most progressive
[Guest]: force for Hindus, let me qualify that, while being an out and out exclusive force for Muslims,
[Guest]: specifically also Christians, also Muslims, that's what gives it this edge.
[Guest]: And of course, the core argument of the book is that edge is defined by democracy.
[Guest]: That once you introduce elections as an incentive to create majority, so as Hindus are post
[Unknown]: independence about, you know, 80% of India, you just have to unite half of them and part
[Unknown]: of uniting half of them is to pick on another, but half of them is also to organize meals
[Guest]: between Brahmins and Dalits, right?
[Guest]: So for example, the critics today are right in criticizing the BJP for these anti-love
[Guest]: jihad laws, right? and because there's no empirical evidence that this is true at all.
[Guest]: And I agree with that.
[Guest]: But what they omit is that the VHP has spent a lot of time financially encouraging inter-caste
[Guest]: marriages.
[Guest]: So in a local village, you know, boy and girl of a different community try to marry, sometimes
[Guest]: the local VHP person you have to go to, to protect yourself against the against the parents.
[Guest]: And if you don't see this, then you're living in fool's paradise.
[Unknown]: And I think many of the critics of the BJP, you know, they get very comfortable saying
[Unknown]: over their fascist, which means you don't have to mobilize against them on the ground.
[Unknown]: You don't have to actually convince your fellow citizens that look, vote for somebody else.
[Guest]: Instead, you can write op-eds in like fancy newspapers and foreign, it may help your career,
[Unknown]: but it doesn't change BJP at all.
[Guest]: But you know, the deeper question you asked Amit, the relationship between caste and Hindu
[Guest]: nationalism is complex.
[Guest]: The RSS is created not just as an upper caste organization, but as an organization created
[Guest]: by a few families from one specific or a couple of specific communities within Maharashtra
[Guest]: Brahmins, the Karade and the Desha Brahmins communities.
[Guest]: And I think that every single Sarsanchalak or head of the RSS, except one, has been a
[Unknown]: Marathi speaking Brahmin.
[Unknown]: Right.
[Unknown]: So that tells you that the critics are not wrong in saying that the BJP originally is
[Unknown]: and even today, if you look at the data, the heart of the BJP is still upper caste consolidation.
[Guest]: So I don't want to go away from that.
[Guest]: But if you wear a mask for a hundred years, Amit, that mask looks like your face and you
[Guest]: know, that the outreach that they've been doing, even in the 1930s itself, back then
[Unknown]: itself, Bhotse as an RSS member was part of the anti-caste or temple entry movement there.
[Guest]: Now you can say that today's Dalits find that patronizing, right, saying that what do you
[Unknown]: feel about reservations?
[Unknown]: Well, when Mandal Commission is announced on August 1990, I have a whole chapter on
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: Advani is under a lot of pressure from his upper caste base to oppose Mandal Commission
[Guest]: recommendations.
[Guest]: But actually he supports them.
[Guest]: He asked for an extension of quota for the upper caste poor, which is what Narendra
[Guest]: Modi has literally done now.
[Unknown]: But otherwise he supports the Mandal Commission and had he not done that, had he opposed it,
[Unknown]: the BJP would have remained an upper caste party.
[Unknown]: He went against the core base, right?
[Guest]: Today, as prime minister, Narendra Modi has done as much for reservations, right?
[Guest]: As any prime minister that India has had, maybe Baahubali Singh, again, that's not a
[Guest]: coincidence, right?
[Guest]: So if you don't like the BJP, at least understand your enemy, right?
[Guest]: And understand why is it that a tea seller's son from an oil pressing OBC caste in Gujarat,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Who doesn't have a strong family background, joins the RSS, not just for social mobility,
[Guest]: but for a sense of brotherhood and fellow feeling, I'm referring, of course, to Narendra
[Guest]: Modi.
[Guest]: If you don't understand this part, which goes along, what is an advertised rebuff to Muslims
[Guest]: right from the beginning of the RSS, it's very hard to defeat it, you know?
[Guest]: And this, you know, the idea, as you know, Amit, and as many of your listeners know,
[Guest]: many Indian Muslim communities have practices that are on the ground are Hindu.
[Guest]: And they operate on the many of these communities, Bhoras, Pujas, etc, etc, Jinnah's own community,
[Guest]: you know, they live their lives on the border of, you know, Islam and Hinduism.
[Guest]: The RSS doesn't like that, because just like they want to dilute the boundaries within
[Guest]: Hinduism, they want to erect strong barriers between Hindu and outside, because if you
[Guest]: don't do that, you can't answer the question, who is a Hindu or what is Hinduism?
[Guest]: And if you don't have a clear answer to that question, how are you going to get all these
[Guest]: people to vote as one?
[Guest]: So right at the beginning, I have a story in the book that Hegdevar notices that there's
[Guest]: a Muslim Sufi shrine near Nagpur, which are also attracting Hindu devotees.
[Guest]: He doesn't like that, you know, he pushes, and my job, as you noticed in the book is
[Guest]: not to support the BJP or to oppose it.
[Guest]: And I hope I have succeeded in that.
[Guest]: That's not my game here.
[Guest]: But I have to say the truth, right?
[Guest]: And the truth is that from the beginning, it has been suspicious of Muslims.
[Guest]: And from the beginning, it has tried to reach out to lower caste Hindus.
[Amit Varma]: No, and you know, the most fascinating phrase from this conversation so far is what you
[Amit Varma]: just said about if you wear a mask for 100 years, it becomes a face, which leads me to
[Amit Varma]: the sort of the meta musing that is there anything called a face or, you know, is it
[Amit Varma]: all just a succession of masks?
[Amit Varma]: But leave that aside.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you know, the other thing I'd also sort of like to point out to my listeners
[Amit Varma]: as well reading this book, I had a sense that this is a very fascinating companion book
[Amit Varma]: to Akshay Mukul's book on the Gita Press, because that is about the social and cultural
[Amit Varma]: movement of Hindu nationalism, while yours focuses on the political side of it.
[Amit Varma]: And for me, the two sort of come together very well.
[Guest]: Can I give you just a little bit of a counter because, you know, I've read the book, I cite
[Guest]: the book, I love Akshay Mukul and he's also been on your podcast, right?
[Guest]: But just to push back just a little bit, see his evidence for is that, you know, the Gita
[Unknown]: Press is I think he looks at Kalyan, which is the magazine of Gita Press, and definitely
[Guest]: many of the views there are regressive, right?
[Guest]: My only pushback is that's not Hindu nationalism, right?
[Guest]: So really, if you want to look at where what political Hinduism is doing, look at the RSS
[Guest]: mouthpiece organizer, right?
[Guest]: Look at some of the BJP magazines, right?
[Guest]: And that's the point that I'm pushing that when it comes to caste issues, especially
[Guest]: your even gender, but mainly caste, the Hindu nationalism or the institutions of Hindu nationalism,
[Guest]: like the RSS or the BJP or the Jansan are far more progressive than the Gita Press is.
[Guest]: The Gita Press is really the organ of traditional Hinduism, right?
[Guest]: And so that's one, you know, debate, I would say me and Akshay Mukul have that, look, he's
[Unknown]: right, right?
[Unknown]: But in many ways, the RSS and BJP want to go away from the stuff that is appearing in
[Guest]: Kalyan, because if Hindu nationalism becomes the description that Akshay Mukul has from
[Guest]: the Gita Press, how on earth is it going to get votes, you know?
[Amit Varma]: No, no, that's absolutely a fair point.
[Amit Varma]: And the picture is vast and complex.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, the elephant will have a leg, the elephant will have a tail, the elephant
[Amit Varma]: will have a trunk.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me now a little bit about many people today speak of Hindu nationalism as if it
[Amit Varma]: is one thing.
[Amit Varma]: But of course, see, you know, the RSS is going in one direction, Savarkar is going in another
[Amit Varma]: direction.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, there are clashes between them, because Savarkar, of course, is political in 1942.
[Amit Varma]: He wants the RSS foot soldiers to help him in the elections and the RSS just says no
[Amit Varma]: and get lost.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, that is at the point where, you know, shortly after that, Nathuram Godse starts
[Amit Varma]: his magazine, where he rails against two things, Mahatma Gandhi and the RSS.
[Guest]: Agrani, Agrani.
[Amit Varma]: Agrani.
[Amit Varma]: So, so tell me a little bit about this sort of very interesting relationship between the
[Amit Varma]: RSS and Savarkar and how they view each other.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, the Hindu Mahasabha as well, which is very prominent then, but doesn't
[Amit Varma]: seem so much now in hindsight, but because it's almost disappeared.
[Amit Varma]: But at the time, that was like another prominent sort of force.
[Guest]: Yeah, it was the first national Hindu party.
[Guest]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Guest]: I mean, the larger question that you're asking is that, you know, Hindu nationalism, as you
[Guest]: said, you know, speaks in many voices, right?
[Guest]: Then how is, but it's nonetheless, I mean, I can't emphasize this organizationally united,
[Guest]: but the Hindu nationalism today is basically comes out of an organizational constellation
[Unknown]: with the RSS as the sun.
[Guest]: There's no two ways about it, you know, and you have plenty of quote-unquote Hindu organizations
[Guest]: like the Karni Seva, which I would not call Hindu nationalist in that sense, because it
[Unknown]: doesn't arise out of the RSS.
[Guest]: You may have some similarities and thoughts, this, that, but they are not, right?
[Guest]: Or no shortage of Akhadas, you know, who have like similar views to like the BJP, but they
[Guest]: are, they don't report to Modi and there's no way Modi can reach out to them.
[Guest]: So Hindu nationalism organizationally is actually quite clear, what is, if you tell me the organization,
[Unknown]: I'll tell you.
[Guest]: Is it Hindu?
[Guest]: Like Hindu Mahasabha today is outside the paper.
[Guest]: Hindu Mahasabha, for example, you know, they celebrate Godse's statues, the RSS is furious
[Unknown]: with that, but you can't say anything because the Hindu Mahasabha today has nothing to do
[Guest]: with the RSS.
[Guest]: Yet, as you pointed out, they speak in different voices and look, this is really the heart
[Unknown]: of the book, which is, that's why the title Jugalbandi, which is that the power of Hindu
[Guest]: nationalism is that just like in a Jugalbandi, you have people playing different instruments,
[Guest]: different music.
[Guest]: Nonetheless, you're able to make music together and RSS celebrates that.
[Amit Varma]: So for example, right now, just to give you one more example, before we go to the Savarkar
[Guest]: Bolvalkar question then, but something to sort of link your listeners to today, many
[Amit Varma]: of the labor reforms that the Narendra Modi government has made, right, is opposed by
[Guest]: the RSS trade union.
[Guest]: How do you make sense of it?
[Guest]: Right?
[Unknown]: They opposed it.
[Unknown]: How do you make sense of it?
[Guest]: Both are part of the RSS, right?
[Guest]: Narendra Modi is an ex-pracharak, BJP is very much part of the RSS family, right?
[Unknown]: But you have to, and the answer is that the RSS has always seen this like an Indian family.
[Unknown]: In Indian family, the, you know, legendarily the mother-in-law and daughter-in-law don't
[Unknown]: get along.
[Unknown]: Brothers may be fighting, right?
[Guest]: The father and the daughter may be having some issues, but nonetheless, at the end of
[Guest]: the day, you stay united.
[Guest]: And again, you know, we can discuss in detail, the heart of this book's argument is that
[Unknown]: the reason the BJP wins, there are many reasons, but I would say the cutting edge reason is
[Guest]: that even when they disagree, they don't split, right?
[Guest]: And the reason they do that is from a very early age, they're taught a certain version
[Guest]: of Hindu history, where you have these different battles where Hindus lose on the battlefield
[Guest]: because at key moments, they stab each other in the back, right?
[Guest]: This is the key.
[Guest]: And so that becomes an organizational ethic for today.
[Unknown]: Now coming back to the question that you asked on Savarkar and Golwalkar, you know, people
[Guest]: whisper about it, but I think I'm one of the first people to point out that they didn't
[Guest]: like each other.
[Unknown]: They didn't like each other, one for the reason you mentioned, which is that Golwalkar wanted
[Guest]: nothing to do with politics, right?
[Guest]: Because he was more focused on the social aspect of Hindu nationalism, which is creating
[Guest]: a common Hindu social identity.
[Guest]: But as I pointed out, that itself is spurred by elections, otherwise, why do you care whether
[Guest]: 40% of Hindus think alike, except you want to make them into a whole pack, right?
[Unknown]: This is Savarkar who straight up wanted to contest elections.
[Unknown]: He became the head of the Hindu Mahasabha, he wanted to win elections and he kept losing.
[Guest]: And he kept losing because the Hindus of that period voted for the better Hindu leader,
[Guest]: better I mean electorally, Mahatma Gandhi, right?
[Unknown]: And that was Savarkar's huge anger, he hated Gandhi not because they were different, but
[Guest]: actually they were pretty similar in that they were appealing to, right?
[Guest]: It's just that Gandhi was able to get the Hindu vote by not being anti-Muslim.
[Unknown]: So that was Savarkar's game, right?
[Unknown]: And but what so that was definitely one reason for the difference.
[Guest]: But another bigger reason is that they were very different personalities.
[Guest]: Now this obsession with unity that the RSS has, with teamwork over all else means that
[Guest]: these kind of brilliant geniuses, you know, who are prima donnas don't have a place in
[Guest]: it.
[Amit Varma]: And I hope that it is descriptively accurate to say that the RSS doesn't have too many
[Guest]: smart people in it.
[Guest]: And I mean it in a very descriptive sense, because you know, think about any organization
[Guest]: Amit that you've worked in, you'd always have these brilliant jerks, I'm sure in Crick
[Guest]: Info you also found these guys, they're very good, you know, they're very bright, but it's
[Guest]: impossible to work with them in an organization.
[Guest]: The RSS is obsessed about weeding these people out, you know, so people like Subramanian
[Guest]: Swami, M.L.Sondhi, who was a Rhodes Scholar, Balraj Madhok, who I spent a lot of time with,
[Unknown]: very bright, much brighter than the average RSS pacharak, you know, a genuine thinker,
[Guest]: right, but just will not subordinate the self to the organization.
[Guest]: In contrast, someone like Atal Bihari Vajpayee, also very bright, but not an intellectual,
[Unknown]: knew that when what he wanted the RSS was unwilling to do, he would, as I say in the
[Guest]: book, sulk on mute, but he wouldn't leave the party.
[Unknown]: And I think Savarkar was a little different, he was a bit of a prima donna.
[Guest]: So even today, when I talk to people in the RSS, I mean, Amit Shah has his photograph,
[Guest]: you know, in his drawing room, Advani has his photograph in the drawing room.
[Guest]: But they also see him as a little bit of a warning that, you know, if you want to succeed
[Guest]: in India, you, you know, you may have Savarkar's grand ideas, but you can't behave like him,
[Amit Varma]: you know.
[Amit Varma]: No, and that's like one of the sort of fascinating stances, this whole RSS is organizational
[Amit Varma]: ethic, where you never speak out against your own organization or against your colleagues
[Guest]: in public.
[Guest]: Externally.
[Unknown]: Exactly.
[Unknown]: In public, that's what I said.
[Guest]: I'm able to show you plenty of situations where internally, there's a far more robust
[Unknown]: debate happening, at least in the period that I'm writing about that happens in the Congress.
[Unknown]: The Congress, they talk about democracy, democracy, there's zero internal democracy, right?
[Guest]: Whereas, you know, I point out that when Vajpayee government was in power, there was no shortage
[Guest]: of his own cabinet ministers like Murali Manohar Joshi, Ram Nayak from his own party, who opposed
[Guest]: his policies and spoke up in cabinet, you know.
[Amit Varma]: I ended my last sentence by saying in public, you did not wait for that.
[Amit Varma]: But yeah, I completely agree with you that the Congress is the opposite ethos, it might
[Amit Varma]: seem there is no dissent, but that is because it is not allowed, there is no internal dissent
[Amit Varma]: either.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a whole sort of different story.
[Amit Varma]: And the examples you pointed out that the people who spoke out like Balraj Madhok and
[Amit Varma]: Subramanian Swamy in the 70s, basically left the party.
[Amit Varma]: So Vajpayee knew that even if he disagrees, he's got to hold his peace and sort of bide
[Amit Varma]: his time.
[Amit Varma]: Now, tell me a little bit about how this ethos comes from their reading of history, specifically
[Amit Varma]: you point in your book to the Third Battle of Panipat in 1761, as having a profound lesson
[Amit Varma]: for the whole Hindu nationalist movement.
[Amit Varma]: And this sort of this particular organizational ethic that you stick together as a team, no
[Amit Varma]: matter how much you disagree in private also comes directly from there.
[Guest]: Tell me a little bit about the importance of that.
[Guest]: Well, so let me tell you, let me tell you the research answer, which is how I got to
[Guest]: the answer.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Because rather than just tell you the answer how I got there.
[Guest]: So I've been, you know, I interviewed about 200 people for this book, many of them from
[Guest]: the RSS, BJP.
[Guest]: And I was, I mean, I was, I was struck by how they kept referring to history.
[Guest]: Of course, it was their version of history.
[Guest]: So, you know, at my university, if I asked a historian, you know, they will say, where's
[Guest]: the footnote?
[Guest]: That's not the point.
[Guest]: In fact, many of them like, not just, they write historical fiction, for example, K.M.
[Guest]: Munshi.
[Guest]: Amit Shah's, you know, one of his favorite books is K.M. Munshi's trilogy on the last
[Guest]: Hindu king of Gujarat, Sidhrath Jai Singh.
[Guest]: It's not a historical book.
[Guest]: It's like, you know, will you call Amish Tripathi, who I like a lot, his writing, he's not a
[Guest]: historian, right?
[Guest]: You can say at the most is historical fiction, but that forms the basis for, you know, what
[Unknown]: the RSS reads and understands about India.
[Guest]: And so I had, you know, this was, I was in Chandrapur, right, this is about a couple
[Guest]: of years back.
[Unknown]: That's about an hour, about a few hours away from Nagpur.
[Unknown]: And I just visited the family home of Mohan Bhagwat, who is the head of the RSS.
[Guest]: And I spoke to his brother, Ravindra, who is the only person in the family who has given
[Unknown]: me permission to quote, right.
[Guest]: And, you know, he spoke a lot about Shakha and, you know, he's a very low key lawyer.
[Guest]: By the way, another sign that, you know, if you go and meet like the brother or a sister
[Guest]: of a top congressman, they'd be living in style, you know, but the, you know, the brother
[Guest]: of the, you know, the, what many people think is the man who really runs India is living
[Guest]: in a low key style and low key house and going to a trial court.
[Unknown]: It's a very different ethic.
[Guest]: So the one thing is that I have to prevent myself, and this is an aside, I mean, of not
[Guest]: becoming too admiring of the RSS, because many of the views which I disagree with, was
[Unknown]: at odds with their personal austerity, you know, which I, it's very hard not to admire.
[Unknown]: And then I meet people in the Congress who in many instances, I may even agree with,
[Guest]: but then I see all of them that, you know, they may be wearing these like kurta pajamas,
[Guest]: but they have like a 30,000 rupee pen, right.
[Unknown]: And I'm like, you know, like, what kind of hypocrisy is this?
[Unknown]: I think most Indians, you know, that's the flavor of the Congress that irritates them,
[Guest]: right.
[Unknown]: It's a massive hypocrisy between the frugal talk and the actual flashy lifestyle, right?
[Unknown]: The RSS is the reverse.
[Unknown]: So anyway, we have spoken a lot about the shakhas.
[Guest]: Now, for those of you listeners who don't know it, the shakha is the principal unit
[Guest]: of the RSS.
[Guest]: You go for about an hour to an open ground and with about 20-30 people, you perform group
[Guest]: exercises for half the time and for half the time, you have an intellectual conversation
[Guest]: or somebody talks that kind of thing and he was talking about the shakha and then I did
[Guest]: something that I think academics should do, which is that instead of actually going to
[Guest]: a shakha at that time, I went on YouTube and saw a lot of shakha videos, you know, which
[Guest]: I shouldn't, you know, I should have gone to shakha, you know, but I was like obsessed
[Guest]: that, you know, why not?
[Guest]: Easy, because all these amateur videos put up by RSS guys on shakha and, you know, my
[Guest]: Western training, Amit had taught me to see these shakhas, you know, the marching as a
[Guest]: sign of martial valor, because part of the Western theory of the RSS is that, you know,
[Guest]: Hindus have a psychological feeling that they're puny compared to the more martial Muslim.
[Guest]: So you know, this is a way to man up Hindus, right?
[Guest]: There is some truth to it, but I saw it and I realized that it was more than just, you
[Guest]: know, marching.
[Guest]: It was actually synchronization.
[Guest]: It was teamwork.
[Guest]: And Amit, I'm sure that in the corporate organization that you have worked, you go for these corporate
[Guest]: retreats sometimes, right?
[Guest]: And you play, and I know it's a bit boring, but I think you play these games, right?
[Guest]: To build team building.
[Guest]: That's what an RSS shakha is.
[Guest]: And in a flash, I understood, Amit, that the reading of history actually becomes an organizational
[Guest]: form that the purpose of the shakha is to tell young Hindus, this is how you work in
[Guest]: a team.
[Guest]: This is how you coordinate.
[Guest]: This is how you stand on each other's shoulder and break the dahi handi, right?
[Guest]: So there is a martial element, but the core element is teamwork, right?
[Guest]: And look, nothing I had read prepared me to understand this, but once I saw it, it was
[Guest]: there all over the place.
[Guest]: You know, it's one of those hidden in plain sight that the history lesson, and you know,
[Guest]: frankly, the RSS is obsessed about it.
[Guest]: So one history lesson that you mentioned was the third battle of Panipat, which was fought
[Guest]: between Ahmed Shah Abdali from Afghanistan and the Marathas.
[Guest]: Now this is particularly important because in the 18th century in India was the Maratha
[Guest]: century.
[Guest]: As many of your listeners will know, the Marathas controlled from Tanjore all the way to Delhi,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: They had it under the, this is the Peshwa, the Maratha empire that sort of succeeds Shivaji.
[Guest]: And the British is a presence in India, but it's a minor presence.
[Guest]: And the RSS believes that had the Marathas not lost in the third battle of Panipat, because
[Unknown]: they got annihilated.
[Unknown]: And that, and not just they got annihilated, even Ahmed Shah Abdali was so badly bruised,
[Unknown]: he has to leave India.
[Unknown]: And so the RSS version is that this created a power vacuum in India, that you neither
[Guest]: had Ahmed Shah Abdali, nor did you have the Marathas, into this power vacuum crept the
[Guest]: British.
[Unknown]: Not just my view, in the 2019 elections, literally what Amit Shah said, and again, if anyone's
[Guest]: paying attention, they should have said, why is this man, whose popular impression is that
[Guest]: look, he doesn't leave, he's not a cultivated man in that sense.
[Guest]: He's actually referring to very precise historical examples, when he's talking about defeating
[Guest]: the Congress in 2019.
[Guest]: And immediately those two things struck me, I would say it's the inside of the book, which
[Guest]: is that the reading of history has created a ethos, where whatever they do, they don't
[Guest]: split, because their view is that Indians always split.
[Guest]: And they're not wrong in that, that anyone who works in India realizes that we are lousy
[Guest]: team players, lousy.
[Guest]: You have like, I'm sure in your time in Cricinfo or wherever else you work, there would have
[Guest]: been five, six different factions, people who are like, have lunch together, other people
[Guest]: have lunch.
[Guest]: In meetings, they will say yes, yes, but then behind your back, they'll say no, no.
[Guest]: Everyone who's listening to this podcast will sympathize with this problem, that you deal
[Guest]: with Indian groups, you deal with factions.
[Guest]: The RSS has understood it, and they spend all their time trying to solve this problem.
[Guest]: That's why they really love it.
[Guest]: That if you look in India, it's a massive competitive advantage, parties are splitting
[Unknown]: all the time.
[Unknown]: Today, the Congress is one, Congress versus Congress, Kapil Sibal is saying something,
[Guest]: Chidambaram is saying something.
[Guest]: It's not even as the RSS points out that having a single caste party, or, you know, will prevent
[Guest]: this.
[Guest]: Samadwadi party is a Yadav party, but the uncle and the nephew are at loggerheads, right?
[Unknown]: Bahujan Samad party is a Jatav party, but Mayawati will never promote another Jatav.
[Guest]: That's why Chandrashekhar Azad Rawan wants to set out his own party.
[Guest]: Because if she does that, then her vote bank gets cut.
[Guest]: This is the water that we drink, that we don't like behaving properly in a group when it
[Guest]: comes to achieving a goal.
[Guest]: The RSS's absolute genius has been to understand it, it is an exclusionary version, right?
[Guest]: And the point is not whether the history lesson is accurate.
[Guest]: The point is that that history lesson has become a very powerful tool for organizational
[Guest]: renewal.
[Guest]: Because when it comes to the third battle of Panipat, the RSS analysis is the Marathas
[Guest]: were lost because they were fighting with each other, the Rajputs and the Jats did not
[Guest]: help.
[Guest]: The Maratha army was not a centralized command, unlike the RSS today, it was a confederacy
[Guest]: where the Peshwas were normally in charge, but you had the Holkas, you had the Sindhias,
[Guest]: you know, or you had the Bhosles.
[Guest]: For them, this is the analysis of the weakness of the Hindu past.
[Guest]: And I would say that the moment that just struck me, that after that conversation on
[Guest]: Shaka, seeing this on YouTube, and then linking it to Israeli, that kind of thing takes three
[Guest]: years to get.
[Guest]: So, you know, to the researchers who are listening amongst you, that insight, right, is not a
[Guest]: simple insight.
[Guest]: You have to immerse yourself, you have to speak to people, and then one day in a flash,
[Guest]: something strikes you.
[Guest]: And now when I say it to RSS people, they are saying, yeah, it's true.
[Guest]: In fact, I got one of the few reviews that have already come, the book is very early,
[Unknown]: has been from an RSS gentleman who says that, look, he's the first English speaking guy
[Guest]: to understand us, even though I am critical, right?
[Guest]: Because this is their self-image.
[Guest]: And I sometimes, and look, once a book like this comes out, people will say that, oh,
[Guest]: this is obvious, this, that, or we should have found this earlier, but sometimes insights
[Guest]: don't happen that way, right?
[Guest]: Like first time someone comes up with an idea, you always say, oh, we should have known this
[Guest]: 50 years earlier, but that never happens like that.
[Amit Varma]: No, and it was fascinating to me, not just, you know, the third battle of Panipat in 1761,
[Amit Varma]: but even, you know, that whole sense of how so many contemporary grievances can be in
[Amit Varma]: some way, you know, given an origin story or given that huge story in history, for example,
[Amit Varma]: you point out about how Amit Shah, of course, grew up in a household where he was surrounded
[Amit Varma]: by books and was well read and one of the other books by K M Munshi, which was a big
[Amit Varma]: influence on him and pretty much, you know, generations of Hindu nationalist leaders was
[Amit Varma]: the one about the sacking of Somnath by Mahmud of Ghazni, which is, you know, which is an
[Amit Varma]: interesting example of how, you know, history can be weaponized and history can shape the
[Amit Varma]: psychology of people and just how they look at the world.
[Amit Varma]: And it also kind of strikes me and, you know, we'll take an aside and I'll ask you this
[Amit Varma]: now instead of at the end, that, you know, does it also work the other way that does
[Amit Varma]: the politics that you have, then affect the history that you do?
[Amit Varma]: And you've managed to keep it out of this book to the extent that I have absolutely
[Amit Varma]: no idea what your political leanings are like.
[Amit Varma]: So is that something that you consciously, you know, warn yourself about in terms of
[Amit Varma]: even the facts that you choose to gather and so on?
[Amit Varma]: And then do you sort of, you know, between the first and the 18th draft, as it were,
[Amit Varma]: do you take, you know, not just yourself, but even your prism in a sense out of it?
[Amit Varma]: Is that something that you thought about?
[Guest]: I try my best.
[Guest]: I mean, that's exactly right.
[Guest]: I try my best to do that.
[Guest]: Because look, the book I'm writing on the BJP before Modi is the most polarizing question
[Unknown]: in India right now, right?
[Guest]: I don't want to add fuel to that fire.
[Guest]: Otherwise, every morning, there are like a million people on Twitter who are doing this.
[Guest]: I don't want the book to fall prey to, is it a pro-BJP book, is it an anti-Modi book?
[Guest]: You know, that's very, very hard to do, very hard to do.
[Guest]: And especially when the book is not an oblique intervention, it's a central question, which
[Guest]: is what is Hindu nationalism and why do they win?
[Guest]: So the challenge before me was how do I make such a political, polarized topic, non-political
[Unknown]: and non-polarized in a way in which you can read the book, whether you hate the BJP or
[Unknown]: like the BJP, and this will help you understand it.
[Guest]: And I just did a video interview with Barkha Dutt and she told me, look, this book didn't
[Guest]: make me angry.
[Guest]: She told me offline.
[Guest]: And she said, I like that about the book and I hope that's how other people read it.
[Guest]: This book is not going to get your BP up and let's take on Modi or let me become an internet
[Unknown]: bug.
[Guest]: This is not, it has a lot of masala, so you enjoy yourself, right?
[Guest]: But I wanted it not to be an intervention that becomes a political football.
[Guest]: And at least in the very early days, but so far I've been able to do it, but yes, I obsessed
[Guest]: about this.
[Guest]: I spent a lot of time thinking about how I should move, how I should move my views on
[Unknown]: the way.
[Unknown]: On the other hand, while I didn't want to be controversial, I had a fidelity to the
[Guest]: truth.
[Unknown]: And sometimes the truth is confidential.
[Guest]: So for example, on the Gujarat riots, I don't hold back at all, as you've read, right?
[Guest]: I know I detail precise, you know, exactly what happened, you know, what, and too often
[Guest]: we ask, is Modi guilty, Modi not guilty?
[Guest]: That's not the real question on the Gujarat riot, it was a massive connivance and state
[Guest]: failure that you have to understand in that sense, right?
[Guest]: So while I wanted to be quote unquote neutral, neutrality doesn't mean on the one hand, on
[Unknown]: the other hand, right?
[Unknown]: Because then when you have violence happening, when you have murder happening, neutrality
[Unknown]: is not that, Oh, somebody said it's a murder, other person said it was deserved.
[Unknown]: That's a very wrong way to do it, right?
[Guest]: But it's a tightrope walk, Amit.
[Guest]: So there's no like template for how to achieve this.
[Unknown]: But I exactly what you said, I thought about it a lot.
[Guest]: And I also, you know, over time, Amit, I've learned to respect the leader that the leader
[Guest]: basically, you know, once the leader realizes there's a relationship between the evidence
[Guest]: you give, and the arguments you give, then the leader is able to forgive a lot, you know,
[Guest]: even if the leader disagrees with you completely, whereas very quickly a leader figures out
[Guest]: if you have an agenda or an angle, and that's what I tried my best to prevent happening.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, in fact, speaking of neutrality, there's this famous thing, there's this famous
[Amit Varma]: cliche about journalists, in fact, a cliched story about how if you are, if one person
[Amit Varma]: says it is raining, and the other person says it is not raining, your job is not to report
[Amit Varma]: them both, it is to go to the window and tell the reader whether it is raining or not.
[Amit Varma]: Except in certain cases, you don't know whether it's a window or a TV screen.
[Amit Varma]: So what do you do?
[Amit Varma]: So to get back to the narrative of the book, you know, we've spoken about the difference
[Amit Varma]: between Savarkar and the RSS and how the RSS is totally uninterested in politics.
[Amit Varma]: At one point, there's this juicy quote, where Savarkar, you know, says to the RSS in 1942,
[Amit Varma]: quote, what will you organize all these people for?
[Amit Varma]: Will you make achar with them?
[Amit Varma]: End quote, and, and then you point out how the assassination of Mahatma Gandhi and the
[Amit Varma]: aftermath of that, when you know, the RSS is sort of ostracized and banned for a few
[Amit Varma]: months, while the Hindu Mahasabha is not, because they have a minister in the cabinet
[Amit Varma]: and all of that makes the RSS realize that no, they do need some kind of political presence
[Amit Varma]: as well.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about sort of this shift in the thinking and how it came about.
[Guest]: Firstly, I mean, I think in this, in the debate between Savarkar and RSS, I think the RSS
[Guest]: has turned out to be right and Savarkar wrong.
[Guest]: In that, this, you know, let's just take Assam, right, where a few years ago, BJP came to
[Guest]: power in Assam.
[Guest]: Now, the BJP came to power in Assam because for the last 20 years, the RSS has been going
[Guest]: there and marching, right?
[Guest]: They have these shakhas, they've been putting money, you know, and they don't put money,
[Guest]: the shakha people pay the money themselves, but they've been putting like organizational
[Guest]: energy into it and basically, you know, tilling the land, creating, you know, social unity
[Guest]: among Hindus while demonizing Muslims, it's a both ways, that is also a jugal bandhi.
[Guest]: That takes, you know, that social transformation then becomes the underpinning for the BJP's
[Unknown]: rise in Assam.
[Guest]: Savarkar didn't see that, like Savarkar just thought that it would be politics that would
[Guest]: unite Hindus together, right, without that, there has to be an underlying social basis
[Guest]: that also pushes it.
[Guest]: And we didn't discuss earlier that part of that social basis is bottom up, which is organization,
[Guest]: etc, etc.
[Guest]: And I told you, I'm not quite sure about the data on that.
[Unknown]: But the other is top down, which is what the RSS does, right?
[Guest]: And that people tend to underestimate that, like even today, for example, Amit, and this
[Guest]: is a good sign of the RSS that if you go to any district in India, and I go and sometimes
[Guest]: I interview district collectors, district magistrates, who are the raja and ranis of
[Guest]: the district, right, the collector, and the collector will, you know, even states which
[Guest]: are under BJP, they will say, we don't know who the local pracharak is, because you know,
[Guest]: it's not, you know, whereas, every time you have a new collector who comes to a district,
[Guest]: all the local doctor, the local head of a this, that, the local head of a granite mill
[Guest]: will all form a queue to do salaam, right?
[Unknown]: The RSS person never does it.
[Guest]: And that's because the RSS doesn't need the state, it's the BJP state that needs the RSS.
[Guest]: That is remarkable, right?
[Guest]: I mean, I show you here in this book, the kind of personal sacrifices RSS people make
[Unknown]: without accepting anything in return.
[Guest]: And again, these are all things that other parties should take from it.
[Guest]: The BSP had this Bahujan Volunteer Force, which was like the RSS, they don't have this,
[Guest]: I met people there.
[Unknown]: The Congress has a Seva Dal, which is absolutely pathetic, how many of your listeners even
[Guest]: know they exist, right?
[Guest]: So on the first part that you asked that, you know, this debate between Savarkar on
[Guest]: a pure political project versus the RSS view, which is a pure social project, which is the
[Guest]: view that it had at that time, right, it's turned out that the social project actually
[Unknown]: benefits the political project in a way in which Savarkar doesn't understand.
[Unknown]: That's the enormous power of the RSS.
[Guest]: The second part of the question you ask is that how does the RSS change its mind?
[Guest]: And the answer is the murder of the Mahatma.
[Guest]: I point out in the book that the RSS had no institutional role in it.
[Guest]: In fact, the Godse Act actually set back Hindu nationalism.
[Guest]: I mean, one of the counterfactuals that I see is that the partition, the Hindu Mahasabha
[Guest]: and Savarkar's criticism of Gandhi turns out to be right, that when you begin to appease
[Guest]: the Muslim League, what you don't, you don't get Hindu-Muslim unity, you get different
[Guest]: countries.
[Guest]: Objectively, the Savarkar's view on Congress politics vis-a-vis Muslim League turned out
[Guest]: to be true, right?
[Guest]: And with Hindu and Sikh refugees pouring into India after 1947, we see a jump in RSS membership
[Guest]: and Hindu Mahasabha membership.
[Guest]: They could have come to power, I mean, far earlier in India compared to 1996, they could
[Guest]: have come to power far earlier, right?
[Guest]: Why does that not happen?
[Guest]: Because the murder of Mahatma, who is a Hindu leader, is linked to the RSS and Hindu Mahasabha,
[Guest]: at least ideologically, if not institutionally, right?
[Guest]: And the RSS is banned, Golwalkar in jail, all the pracharaks are put in jail.
[Unknown]: On the other hand, they are able to notice that the Hindu Mahasabha, which is Savarkar's
[Guest]: political party, is not banned, right?
[Guest]: Even though the groups that were the Madanlal, Pahua, Apte, Bodse were all Hindu Mahasabha
[Unknown]: members, right?
[Unknown]: And they also realized why, which is that the Hindu Mahasabha is a coalition, is an
[Unknown]: ally in parliament, right?
[Guest]: It's the industry minister, Shyam Prasad Mukherjee, who's from the Hindu Mahasabha.
[Unknown]: And so Nehru and Patel realized that, look, it's a splinter group, not the actual Hindu
[Guest]: Mahasabha that's doing it.
[Guest]: And the RSS realized and noticed that the ban that they were put through, which frankly
[Guest]: is undemocratic.
[Guest]: Because if there's no evidence to ban someone, to jail someone for this long, while I'm very
[Unknown]: vocal when it's the BJP that violates civil liberty, what the Congress did to the RSS
[Guest]: at that time, while had popular support, is to me at least a violation of civil liberties.
[Unknown]: But the lesson the RSS learned is not a single MP spoke up in parliament in their favor.
[Unknown]: And even though they wanted nothing to do with the state and government, the government
[Unknown]: wanted something to do with it, which is why Golwalkar reluctantly in 1951, agrees to the
[Guest]: setting up of a separate political party, the Jansa, with a lot of RSS members and the
[Guest]: face would be Shyam Prasad Mukherjee, who has since left the Hindu Mahasabha, to contest
[Unknown]: in India's first elections.
[Guest]: So the RSS comes to politics because of Gandhi's murder and its quote-unquote oppression that
[Guest]: it faces immediately after that, and very quickly, the RSS realizes that its social
[Guest]: aim and the political aim of the party are actually quite united.
[Amit Varma]: No, what you said about, you know, the RSS's vision, winning out over Savarkar's is also
[Amit Varma]: echoed in, you know, one of my favorite quotes about politics, which, you know, all my listeners
[Amit Varma]: will groan now because they know what's coming.
[Amit Varma]: But Andrew Breitbart once said, politics is downstream of culture.
[Amit Varma]: And I think the great triumph of Hindu nationalism comes from the RSS recognizing the truth of
[Amit Varma]: this, in a sense.
[Guest]: And sorry to interrupt you again, that's also the failure of the Nehruvian idea of India,
[Guest]: because they didn't understand the sentence that you just said, that Nehruvian politics
[Guest]: was seen as unmoved from culture.
[Amit Varma]: A point that I repeatedly keep making, you know, it's become another trope of my show
[Amit Varma]: that I ask my guests something I won't ask you because it's too much of a cliche now
[Amit Varma]: and we have so much else to talk about, but was our relatively liberal constitution imposed
[Amit Varma]: on an illiberal society and therefore was always that top-down imposition was always
[Amit Varma]: sort of bound to fail in some way.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, having said that, I can sort of contradict that immediately by pointing
[Amit Varma]: out that the first leader of the Jansang, Shama Prasad Mukherjee, in many tellings comes
[Amit Varma]: across as a remarkably liberal man.
[Amit Varma]: For example, he left the Hindu Mahasabha because he was upset that they would not admit members
[Amit Varma]: of other religions, which he thought was completely pointless.
[Amit Varma]: And I did an episode recently with Rupur Dhaman Singh on the making of the first amendment.
[Amit Varma]: And there, if you just look at all the arguments and what people are doing across sides, it
[Amit Varma]: appears to be Shama Prasad Mukherjee, who is a great liberal and Nehru, who is the enemy
[Amit Varma]: of liberalism.
[Amit Varma]: And again, all those arguments and all those quotes are in the public domain.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I was struck by this very intriguing thing that you said about the Bharatiya Jansang
[Amit Varma]: when it was formed.
[Amit Varma]: And this is possibly partly because even though, you know, Shama Prasad wants to form it, he
[Amit Varma]: asked Golwalkar, he says no, but then eventually, you know, enough of Golwalkar's colleagues
[Amit Varma]: want it.
[Amit Varma]: So he agrees and a lot of RSS people come in.
[Amit Varma]: And you speak about how this represents a movement away from primadonnas and ideologues
[Amit Varma]: towards orators and organizers.
[Amit Varma]: And primadonnas you've spoken about before, but you speak about how temperamentally they
[Amit Varma]: are dangerous for an organization, ideologues, you know, you use the word theorems for them
[Amit Varma]: just as you do temperament for primadonnas.
[Amit Varma]: But the orators and organizers are interesting because this almost, in a sense, then besieges
[Amit Varma]: the future of the BJP, of course, today with Modi and Shah, but even earlier than with
[Amit Varma]: sort of Vajpayee and Advani, which is, you know, the meat of your remarkable book.
[Amit Varma]: So let's talk about the two of them now and the very different circumstances in which
[Amit Varma]: they kind of, you know, came to being.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about the early Vajpayee because, you know, he's born in Gwalior on Christmas
[Amit Varma]: Day in 1924.
[Amit Varma]: And you speak about how Gwalior is a hub for resurgent Hindu identity, in your words.
[Amit Varma]: And you also say that, you know, Vajpayee's future and therefore India's future could
[Amit Varma]: have been different had he been born in, say, United Provinces.
[Amit Varma]: So explain to me a bit of Vajpayee's background and how that sort of shaped him and eventually,
[Amit Varma]: you know, led him to becoming part of the RSS.
[Guest]: Well, I mean, coming to the first part of your question, from the very beginning, Hindu
[Guest]: nationalism has realized that they need an orator and an organizer.
[Guest]: So the first Jugalbandi in that respect was Shamprasad Mukherjee, who was, you know, the
[Guest]: youngest vice chancellor of Calcutta University, erudite man, etc, etc.
[Amit Varma]: He was vice chancellor at the age of 33.
[Amit Varma]: And no doubt, many people will point out that people at the age of 33 are still doing their
[Amit Varma]: PhDs in JNU.
[Amit Varma]: They will snark.
[Guest]: There you go.
[Guest]: Right.
[Unknown]: But Jugalbandi was very, so he was very consciously made the face of the movement because he wanted
[Guest]: somebody who would speak in Parliament.
[Guest]: At the same time, you had Dindayal Upadhyay, who was seconded by Guru Golwalkar, who was
[Guest]: the head of the RSS at that time, to be the Advani for Shamprasad Mukherjee and then, of
[Guest]: course, you have Vajpayee Advani.
[Guest]: And now you have Modi and Amit Shah.
[Guest]: Point being that there's a bit of social engineering that there was a space for someone like Vajpayee.
[Guest]: And because Shamprasad Mukherjee dies young, right, or dies early, there was a need to
[Guest]: replace so that to understand Vajpayee's rise, you have to understand Vajpayee's personality,
[Guest]: etc, etc.
[Guest]: But the fact that luck, and this is something you referred to beginning, luckily for Vajpayee,
[Guest]: the very traits he exhibited was something that Hindu nationalism required hugely after
[Unknown]: the death of Shamprasad Mukherjee.
[Guest]: But the sort of corollary to that is if it wasn't Vajpayee, it may have been somebody
[Guest]: else.
[Guest]: That person may not have had the talent to take the BJP to victory, you know, so many
[Guest]: decades later.
[Guest]: So Vajpayee, his family, he's a Kanyakumari Brahmin, they are poor, they are originally
[Guest]: from Bateshwar in what is today Uttar Pradesh.
[Guest]: But I think his grandfather moves to Gwalior, which is a princely state, is a princely state
[Guest]: run by a Hindu king, which is the Maharaja of Gwalior, he's a Maratha, he's a Sindhiya,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Again, a progeny of, you know, according to the RSS, you know, the person who made one
[Guest]: of the mistakes in the third battle of Panipat, right?
[Guest]: And harsh critics would argue that even today, so many hundred years later, you see a Sindhiya
[Guest]: splitting the party.
[Guest]: It's a bit mean, but you know, I am sorry for that.
[Guest]: So Vajpayee comes, you know, it's a very traditional Gangetic Brahmin family, he wears a sacred
[Guest]: thread.
[Guest]: His brother also wears a sacred thread and the RSS happens to come to Gwalior because
[Guest]: it is Marathi speaking, right?
[Guest]: Otherwise, it wouldn't have come there that quickly.
[Guest]: So very soon after the creation of the RSS, you know, it's been able to percolate into
[Unknown]: Gwalior because the king of the Raja of Gwalior is a Maratha, Marathi speaking, was part of
[Guest]: the old Maratha Empire, right?
[Guest]: And that's also why Vajpayee Marathi is very good because if you go to Gwalior even today,
[Guest]: you have Marathi speakers and you have Hindi speakers, right?
[Unknown]: And the RSS comes there and he joins the Shaka and he joins the Shaka because of his caste,
[Guest]: because you know, he was a, you know, a Brahmin and he joins and that was the social base
[Guest]: of the RSS at that point.
[Guest]: And I also mentioned there that on the first day, he's wearing a sacred thread, but very
[Guest]: quickly he realizes that he doesn't want markers that distinguish himself from other Hindus
[Guest]: and he removes the sacred thread and his own brother, I don't think I mentioned it in the
[Guest]: book on, you know, in the first days in the Shaka, he cooks his own meals because he doesn't
[Unknown]: want somebody who's not a Brahmin to cook his meals and within three, four days he ends
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: To me, that's a wonderful story because it tells you that compared to traditional Hinduism,
[Guest]: the RSS, again, for electoral logic, initially pushes you to be much more progressive, right?
[Guest]: And that is Vajpayee's trajectory and his father then becomes a teacher in the Gwalior
[Guest]: education system and employee of the Maharaja of Gwalior.
[Guest]: He's a fantastic orator, that is Vajpayee's great skill.
[Guest]: He's a middle-rung poet.
[Guest]: So people who say Vajpayee is a great poet haven't read his poetry like I have, but what
[Guest]: it gives him is a rhythm of sentences, right?
[Guest]: That mixed with Vajpayee's extraordinary political antennae and the fact that his father was
[Guest]: also a very good speaker gives Vajpayee's legendary quality, which is that he says a
[Guest]: sentence that the left says is in their favor and the right says is in their favor.
[Guest]: This is Vajpayee's like eternal quality, right?
[Guest]: Like he'll say something in parliament and parliament will say, wow, this man is one
[Guest]: of us without irritating the RSS, Arvani just can't do that, right?
[Guest]: So that's Vajpayee's kind of background and as I argue, it's a background that is far
[Guest]: apart from the moderate personality eventually gets and what changes Vajpayee from a provincial
[Guest]: gangetic Brahmin into this kind of liberal avtaar that most liberal Indians kind of said
[Guest]: right man in the wrong party are two things, Amit.
[Guest]: One is it's the influence of parliament.
[Guest]: At the age of 34, Vajpayee becomes an MP again, social engineering because Dindyal Upadhyay
[Guest]: who runs the party at that time wants a good articulate replacement for Shyama Prashad
[Unknown]: Mukherjee.
[Guest]: And he's in parliament from the age from 1957, basically unbroken to 2007, 2008, that's enormous,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Whether in the Lok Sabha or the Rajya Sabha and Vajpayee does not care who represents
[Guest]: the party.
[Guest]: He wants to make sure that he has the best seat to speak in parliament.
[Guest]: That's his self-image, right?
[Guest]: And parliament in that period, right, is an Aruvian consensus.
[Guest]: Even if you're not part of the Congress, you broadly believe in an Aruvian consensus to
[Guest]: be respectable in parliament, you have to accommodate the Aruvian consensus and Vajpayee
[Unknown]: does that.
[Guest]: And he does that not because he's a half a congressman as his right wing critics allege,
[Guest]: but that is what you have to behave to get respectability in Congress of that period.
[Guest]: So that is the first liberalizing influence of Vajpayee, given his social background.
[Guest]: The other, which has led to some controversy in the book is his longtime companion Rajkumari
[Guest]: Kaul.
[Guest]: They are in love when Vajpayee is 17, she's 16 in Gwalior, they study in the same college
[Guest]: together, but it doesn't happen, I think, because the families oppose, but they meet
[Guest]: a couple of decades later and at that time, Rajkumari Kaul is married and Vajpayee then
[Guest]: has a long standing relationship with her, her husband, Mr. Kaul, Rajkumari Kaul and
[Guest]: Vajpayee live together, right?
[Guest]: And she is Indira Gandhi's second cousin.
[Guest]: She's a remarkable woman, I think one of the most under studied political women of the
[Guest]: 20th century in that she plays a role in liberalizing one of the greatest politicians of 20th century
[Guest]: India, namely Vajpayee.
[Guest]: She has long discussions on him, say on the Ayodhya movement, she's opposed to the demolition
[Guest]: of Babri Masjid, and she's a key part of the puzzle in trying to understand why someone
[Guest]: like Vajpayee with Vajpayee's background began to be seen as a moderate.
[Amit Varma]: No, no.
[Amit Varma]: And, and, you know, I found it fascinating how you've quoted Vajpayee at one point as
[Amit Varma]: saying quote, I am unmarried, but not, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So that was fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: I wanted to explore a sort of a couple of interesting facets of Vajpayee's personality
[Amit Varma]: here.
[Amit Varma]: And one is even though Advani, who we'll speak about later, had an actual cosmopolitan background
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, Vajpayee in many ways is also fairly cosmopolitan in the sense that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, in that 95 meeting that you write about where Advani says that he'll be the
[Amit Varma]: prime ministerial face of the BJP, Vajpayee cautions him by quoting Hazrat Nizamuddin
[Amit Varma]: and he says, Delhi toh bahut door hai, and you know, he's a man who likes Bhang Pakoras,
[Amit Varma]: he makes prawn curry, you know, he likes his whiskey, you describe him as an epicurean.
[Amit Varma]: So it seems very interesting that, and this is something that is also say common with
[Amit Varma]: Advani, whose background would make you expect this much more, but he's also, you know, Advani
[Amit Varma]: is also into English literature and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And the interesting thing is that where their political vision or perhaps a political vision
[Amit Varma]: that they are sort of driven to by circumstances can be exclusionary and can have a narrow
[Amit Varma]: vision of what a person in India is or what a Hindu is.
[Amit Varma]: In their lived reality, in the concrete, outside the abstract, in the world of the concrete,
[Amit Varma]: they are actually quite cosmopolitan and syncretic and absorbing all of these different cultures
[Amit Varma]: and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And this about Vajpayee seemed very interesting to me.
[Amit Varma]: What was also fascinating though, which is sort of a counterpoint to that, is you quote
[Amit Varma]: a family friend of his saying, quote, from an early age, Vajpayee resented English speaking
[Amit Varma]: Indians, but he was also fascinated by them.
[Amit Varma]: That's the story of his life.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this has multiple resonances.
[Amit Varma]: You know, first of all, to what extent do you feel that this was true and not just something
[Amit Varma]: that this person was saying?
[Amit Varma]: Did it change with Rajkumari Kaul, who was earlier Rajkumari Haksar, and as you pointed
[Amit Varma]: out, second cousin of Indira Gandhi, to what extent did she change that because, you know,
[Amit Varma]: he was fluent in English and obviously brought a lot more of these influences?
[Amit Varma]: And to what extent does that sort of resentment towards English speaking elites linger on
[Amit Varma]: and shape the politics today?
[Amit Varma]: Because it is true that a lot of Indian politics has been shaped in a top down way from English
[Amit Varma]: speaking elites who are disconnected with the rest of the country.
[Amit Varma]: And it is natural and rational, you know, to imagine resentment towards that.
[Guest]: Yeah, I think that that's a key way to understand the RSS, this insecurity and this anger at
[Amit Varma]: English speaking elites, like me, Amit, like, and this made my life very hard when I started
[Guest]: doing interviews, you know, and the thing is, I didn't pretend to be otherwise, right?
[Guest]: I didn't pretend that, you know, I was pretty clear, look, I grew up in Bandra, that I've
[Guest]: gone to, you know, Harvard and Princeton, like, but at the same time, they want you
[Guest]: to know their story.
[Unknown]: So it's a complicated, you know, it's a complicated relationship.
[Guest]: You talk about Vajpayee, but you know, Advani is even more syncretic.
[Guest]: Yes, he came from an English speaking background, he knew, which is defined as, you know, English
[Unknown]: before you know any other Indian language, right?
[Guest]: He did.
[Guest]: I mean, he knew English before he knew Hindi.
[Guest]: But at the same time, he, the kind of Hinduism that is practiced amongst Sindhis of that
[Guest]: period in Karachi, is a very syncretic one.
[Guest]: His, in his house, you have Sikh rituals, you know, that are practiced.
[Guest]: His mother used to go to a Sufi shrine, precisely the kind of shrine that the RSS, the Higdewar
[Guest]: opposed, which we discussed earlier.
[Guest]: So it's a syncretic background, and he's English speaking, he's playing tennis, as I mentioned,
[Guest]: you have to understand Advani is to understand him through the catastrophe of partition,
[Guest]: and his desire to make his family and India whole again, that sense he comes across as
[Guest]: a much more sympathetic character in this book, than the cartoonish versions of him,
[Guest]: you know, wearing that hat in the Rath Yatra, right, saying that here's a man who is really
[Guest]: shaped by these grand forces of history that he's trying to, you know, come to terms with
[Guest]: after so many years.
[Guest]: And ironically, Amit, the quality that pole vaults Advani into the heart of Hindu nationalism
[Guest]: is the fact that he speaks English.
[Guest]: So Atal Bihari Vajpayee becomes an MP in 1957, and also leader of the party, the Jan Sangh
[Guest]: in Parliament, even though they had, I think, only three MPs, and Dindya Lupadia himself,
[Guest]: a dhoti wearing Hindi speaking type, realizes very quickly that Luckhians Delhi is English
[Guest]: speaking.
[Guest]: So if you want to speak to journalists, you want to speak to diplomats, I mean, you know,
[Guest]: he has the same insight that Arnab Goswami has had like 50 years later.
[Guest]: But the difference is that Dindya Lupadia says, look, I need somebody to help Vajpayee
[Guest]: navigate this English speaking world.
[Guest]: And who's the English speaking person we have in our midst?
[Guest]: It's Lal Krishna Advani, who happens to be in Rajasthan.
[Guest]: That's the immediate reason that he is moved as secretary to Vajpayee in 1957.
[Guest]: So it's this very complicated relationship between the English speaking world and Hindu
[Guest]: nationalism, given that that was a reason for the rise of Advani himself, right.
[Guest]: And of course, once Vajpayee gets much bigger, his political constituency becomes the English
[Guest]: speaking liberals compared to Advani, right, even though the English speaking types who
[Guest]: get into the BJP, Chandan Mitra, Swapan Das Gupta, Vajpayee can't relate to any of them.
[Unknown]: They are all Advani's men.
[Unknown]: So you know, this is a, it's a fascinating thread that runs through this book, without
[Unknown]: a, and I like it also because it's a contradictory thread, there's no clear, you know, it's like
[Amit Varma]: a river that is kind of meandering up and down there, the relationship between English
[Amit Varma]: speaking resentment and Hindu nationalism.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, there's a very telling quote in your book about the time where, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Advani was sent to Delhi to help out Vajpayee.
[Amit Varma]: And you quote an RSS man active during that period, as saying, quote, there are two types
[Amit Varma]: of Indians, those who use Western toilets, and those who use Indian toilets, we use Indian
[Amit Varma]: toilets, but we need some people who use Western toilets, stop it, which is why, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Advani is sort of sent there.
[Amit Varma]: Another sort of very interesting thing about Advani is that this sort of impression of
[Amit Varma]: Advani as a hardliner and Vajpayee as a moderate.
[Amit Varma]: And I think there is perhaps much more truth to Vajpayee's moderation.
[Amit Varma]: But Advani was sort of, you know, circumstances almost forced him to take this hardline stand
[Amit Varma]: because first of all, in 1985, he's kind of, you know, pitchforked into the leadership
[Amit Varma]: of the party when Vajpayee has to go because, you know, all the Hindu vote has gone to Rajiv
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi and all of that, and then over a period of time, he, you know, becomes hardline out
[Amit Varma]: of circumstance.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I'm struck by a bunch of quotes about him.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, and one is, of course, from Balraj Madhok, who was opposed to both Advani and
[Amit Varma]: Vajpayee and Balraj Madhok called Advani, a quote, boneless wonder, who does not have
[Amit Varma]: his own character or opinion, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And much later, you know, you quote Arun Shourie as saying of the time in the cabinet together
[Amit Varma]: in the Vajpayee government, that Advani was the second most powerful man in the country.
[Amit Varma]: The most powerful was the man who last met him, you know, indicating that he is so impressionable
[Amit Varma]: as it were.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about Advani's beliefs, like we've already sort of spoken about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Vajpayee the orator and, you know, Advani, the organizer coming together and that's how
[Amit Varma]: they start.
[Amit Varma]: But Advani also becomes not bad at orating at a later period in time.
[Amit Varma]: But so he's an organizer.
[Amit Varma]: He's looking after the party.
[Amit Varma]: The party has an ethic.
[Amit Varma]: It is a team ethic.
[Amit Varma]: He has a cosmopolitan background.
[Amit Varma]: You know, he went to St. Patrick's and, you know, you describe an incident about I think
[Amit Varma]: in the early 2000s, he goes to Pakistan and he goes to that school and they sing for he's
[Amit Varma]: a jolly good fellow for him and, you know, his eyes missed over, as you point out.
[Amit Varma]: So he is that kind of man.
[Amit Varma]: He's also what is the sense that you get about, you know, what his views are like?
[Amit Varma]: What does he really believe?
[Amit Varma]: What is he driven by?
[Amit Varma]: Like Swapan Dasgupta at one point said, as you've quoted in your book, that Advani was
[Amit Varma]: a different man before and after the Rath Yatra, which is interesting.
[Amit Varma]: But I think that is, you know, he would have reached a bit of an age there where your basic
[Amit Varma]: character doesn't change.
[Amit Varma]: So are these people political animals who are responding to incentives in the political
[Amit Varma]: marketplace, which later determines the way that they are looked at or at their core,
[Amit Varma]: is there something else which you can point to?
[Amit Varma]: Like with Vajpayee, certainly you can say that he had things that he stood up for and
[Amit Varma]: strong beliefs.
[Amit Varma]: For example, when, you know, the Golwalkar asked him to break up his relationship with
[Amit Varma]: the Rajkumari, he just flat out refused.
[Amit Varma]: And you know what, give me a sense of Advani in that sense.
[Guest]: You know, the narrative spine of this book, Amit, is Vajpayee and Advani.
[Guest]: So it was very important for me to get their personalities right, very important, right.
[Guest]: And to have that, look, people change, as you said, people change over 80 years, but
[Guest]: they also have to have some part of their personalities that are constant.
[Guest]: And after thinking about this for three years, I realized that the two core personality traits
[Guest]: of Advani, right, one is loyalty, you know, he's defined by loyalty, you know, and it's
[Guest]: a trait that, you know, is very welcome in the RSS.
[Guest]: And the second trait is underconfidence, he's constantly unsure, he has this Hamlet-like
[Guest]: quality, where, you know, he's constantly unsure to do or not to do, to be or not to
[Guest]: be, you know, in a sense, Vajpayee doesn't have that at all.
[Guest]: So right from the beginning, when he meets Vajpayee, he's in awe of Vajpayee's speaking
[Guest]: talent.
[Guest]: And Advani himself is very underconfident about his speaking talent, right.
[Guest]: He's an unnatural politician in that sense.
[Guest]: But you know, he's loyal, he spends a lot of time with the party carder, the party carder
[Guest]: like that, Vajpayee has no time for them, Vajpayee only has time for Parliament.
[Guest]: So over time, he develops this hardline image amidst for three reasons.
[Guest]: One is that he listens to the party, he listens to the RSS, he spends morning to evening like
[Guest]: going to party headquarters, listening to what people are saying, Vajpayee doesn't do
[Guest]: that at all.
[Guest]: And the party is far more hardline than Parliament.
[Guest]: So Advani becomes the face of the party.
[Guest]: That's the first reason why he gets a hardline image.
[Guest]: The second reason he gets a hardline image is that Vajpayee liked that, because Vajpayee
[Guest]: understood the fact that you need an orator and an organiser and at the times in which
[Guest]: the RSS was tiring of him, he would say, look, if you're tiring of me, I'll put a different
[Guest]: party president that you like, who will also be loyal to me.
[Guest]: And that was Advani.
[Unknown]: So they needed the jugalbandhi, Vajpayee understood it, Advani understood it also.
[Guest]: The third reason he's given the impression of being hardline today is the Rath Yatra,
[Guest]: right, and the Babri Majid demolition.
[Guest]: No question, that's the defining feature of Advani.
[Guest]: I point out in the book though that Rath Yatra, of which I'm critical, if you've read that,
[Guest]: was not because he was a religious zealot at all.
[Guest]: It was sheer naked political opportunism.
[Guest]: That in August 1990, the VP Singh government announces the Mandal Commission report, where
[Guest]: you have reservations in central government jobs for OBCs or backward castes.
[Guest]: This immediately sets off panic among the upper caste base of the BJP.
[Guest]: And Advani is able to see that if this continues like this, there will be a split between the
[Unknown]: upper caste and the backward caste, you know, and if it's just upper caste, the BJP cannot
[Unknown]: come to power.
[Guest]: So literally a month later, he announces the Rath Yatra, where he travels from Somnath
[Guest]: to Ayodhya, or he plans to travel to Ayodhya.
[Guest]: The Ayodhya movement is by that time already seven years old.
[Guest]: So nothing explains the timing of the Rath Yatra, except that literally a month earlier,
[Guest]: you had the VP Singh government, right, and I would say that that is the sheer political
[Guest]: opportunism, right, rather than, you know, deeply held Islamophobia and a sign of that
[Guest]: is that in all his speeches that you see there, right, I don't want to defend him, he's very
[Guest]: careful not to criticize Muslims directly, which is something you hear every day in this
[Unknown]: government.
[Guest]: You know, he's very, very careful and even when the crowd starts saying something against
[Guest]: Prophet Mohammed or something, Advani is the first to shush them up, you know, saying that's
[Unknown]: not what this is about.
[Guest]: That's what gives him this Hamlet-like quality that his own social instincts and the political
[Guest]: persona that frankly is good for him, like, you know, it's good to be called a hardliner
[Amit Varma]: because the parliament and English-speaking liberals will hate you, but the RSS and the
[Unknown]: cadre will say, okay, he's one of us, right?
[Guest]: But that's what gives Advani this complexity and I don't want to defend him or anything
[Guest]: like that, but certainly as the beginning of the book shows Amit, he could have become
[Guest]: prime minister in 96, but he is understands, or you can say underconfident, or he understands
[Guest]: his own limitations that if he is prime minister, the BJP will never get allies and so you need
[Guest]: someone like Vajpayee.
[Guest]: So he gets Vajpayee out of cold storage and Vajpayee is then the PM candidate and then
[Guest]: Vajpayee becomes PM again, 96, 98 and 99 and Advani serves under him and I just think that's
[Unknown]: remarkable because how many politicians, you know, are aware of their own limitations.
[Guest]: Certainly, you know, today's Congress and Rahul Gandhi are not aware of their limitations,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And in that sense, certainly when you read this book, the hundred percent negative image
[Unknown]: of Advani, some of you may have, will be diluted just a little bit and the hundred percent
[Guest]: positive image of Vajpayee that some of you have will be diluted just a little bit.
[Guest]: They were a jugal bandhi, they were at some level play acting.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, responding to incentives, before I get to my next question, a couple
[Amit Varma]: of asides and the first is an aside to an aside.
[Amit Varma]: So it may seem completely irrelevant, but I remember, you know, there used to be this
[Amit Varma]: news magazine in the early 90s called NewsTrack, which would go around in videotapes.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember, you know, watching an episode of NewsTrack where there was an interview
[Amit Varma]: of Devi Lal and it was fabulous if someone can find the clip, I don't know if it exists,
[Amit Varma]: where he is basically sitting in, I think a banyan and a dhoti in the garden on a chair
[Amit Varma]: with his feet up and the camera angle is, you know, at his shoes.
[Amit Varma]: So his shoes are really big and he is kind of in the background.
[Amit Varma]: And the interviewer asks him, ki Devi Lal ji, apne apne bete ko chief minister kyu banaya?
[Amit Varma]: And Devi Lal says, toh kya Bhajan Lal ke chhore ko banaya?
[Amit Varma]: Which is a masterful answer.
[Amit Varma]: But the reason this aside came to me was because of the next aside, which is again about how
[Amit Varma]: circumstance seems to shape politics in the sense that VP Singh went in for all the Mandal
[Amit Varma]: stuff he did partly because Devi Lal was agitating and he felt politically insecure.
[Amit Varma]: And then Advani responds to that with, you know, the Rath Yatra and then whatever happens
[Amit Varma]: happens and it, you know, it's like a domino effect of one thing after another and you
[Amit Varma]: wonder what would have happened if the chain was broken.
[Amit Varma]: Now, tell me a little bit about sort of the relationship between Advani and Vajpayee like
[Amit Varma]: at one level, their backgrounds are pretty different.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you point out how Vajpayee is from Gwalior, the orthodox strand of colonial era
[Amit Varma]: Hinduism as it were, Advani is from the reformist strand.
[Amit Varma]: He is, you know, in Karachi where he's going to St. Patrick's and he's playing tennis and
[Amit Varma]: the Guru Granth Sahib is at home in one sense, he's almost like his family is partly Nanak
[Amit Varma]: Panthi, it would seem.
[Amit Varma]: And then they both joined the RSS and they come together and you describe their first
[Amit Varma]: meeting where, you know, Shyamaprasad Mukherjee goes to Kota to campaign before the 5152 elections
[Amit Varma]: and because he's not great at Hindi, the RSS sends Vajpayee who was earlier the editor
[Amit Varma]: of their magazine to help him out and Advani is just smitten.
[Amit Varma]: And he says about Vajpayee, he describes him later as quote, a poet who had drifted into
[Amit Varma]: politics, something was smoldering within him and the fire in his belly produced an
[Amit Varma]: unmistakable glow on his face, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And at a sense, it almost, you know, it seems like and they're both deeply emotional people,
[Amit Varma]: as Vasundhara Rajesh India tells you, I think at another point of the story, and it seems
[Amit Varma]: to me like a beautiful sort of bromance that is developing through the book that these
[Amit Varma]: are such different people, Vajpayee much more flamboyant, given to expression, slightly
[Amit Varma]: more colourful life, while Advani, despite the cosmopolitan background is a very stable
[Amit Varma]: personality, very Uxorious, if I might use that word, I shouldn't use jargon, but Uxorious,
[Amit Varma]: however you pronounce it means someone absolutely devoted to his wife, which is, of course,
[Amit Varma]: a very formidable Kamla Jagdiani, who also kind of stays in the background, just like
[Amit Varma]: Rajkumari Kaul.
[Amit Varma]: What was the relation like, you've also spoken about how, you know, in later in the 60s and
[Amit Varma]: the 70s, they'd go and watch movies together, and they just loved each other's company.
[Amit Varma]: And yet there is a sort of drift when, you know, the first Vajpayee government actually
[Amit Varma]: spends his time because Vajpayee realizes that there isn't enough talent in the RSS.
[Amit Varma]: And so he brings in all these other people and centralizes a lot of things in the PMO.
[Amit Varma]: And Advani is a bit resentful.
[Amit Varma]: What's the personal relationship been growing through the years like Advani makes in a sense
[Amit Varma]: a supreme sacrifice in 95, where he says that, you know, Vajpayee should be the PM candidate,
[Amit Varma]: and the whole party is just aghast at that, and, you know, he is the obvious choice.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about that relationship and your sense of it.
[Amit Varma]: And was it moving in parts to sort of, you know, look at how that unfolds through the
[Amit Varma]: years?
[Guest]: So, I mean, I look at this relationship, this Jugalbandi as having three different strands.
[Guest]: The first strand, which is, I think, the, you know, the one that is essential is that
[Guest]: they like each other, they like hanging out.
[Guest]: So think about your listeners to think about friends you like to hang out with, there's
[Guest]: no formula for it.
[Guest]: Like, you know, you, you may like somebody else, but you may not like like shooting the
[Guest]: breeze for an evening with somebody, you know, somebody else you may disagree and argue with,
[Guest]: but it's fun to hang out with.
[Guest]: They were like that.
[Guest]: So they, you know, they, and it's hard to reduce that chemistry into three or four equations.
[Guest]: So they like Bollywood films, right?
[Guest]: That was an aspect of the personal relationship.
[Guest]: They like to eat, right?
[Guest]: They used to go out, Advani was a vegetarian, Vajpayee was anything but, you know, they
[Guest]: would discuss, you know, each other's family.
[Guest]: So they would do that kind of thing.
[Guest]: They had a similar emotional quotient that they could, you know, cry and laugh at the
[Guest]: same time.
[Guest]: There was definitely a fanboy element, Advani when he met as the quote that you read out,
[Guest]: now Advani was, you know, startled by Vajpayee and look, I think one of the big strengths
[Guest]: of the book is I never met Vajpayee and I mean this because anyone I know who met Vajpayee
[Guest]: was bedazzled by him, you know, any journalist, anyone who sees it in parliament, he could
[Guest]: make time stop and I would encourage your listeners to go at least on YouTube and see
[Guest]: some of his speeches, you know, even when, you know, he's being calculated this, that
[Guest]: he, you know, unlike many politicians who try to convince you, Vajpayee could make you
[Guest]: laugh.
[Guest]: He could make you smile.
[Guest]: You know, his sentences had an angularity to it.
[Guest]: He in his best sense, he had the ability to uplift you.
[Guest]: Now the problem with that is that may not be the person he is.
[Guest]: Many cases, many times it is, sometimes it's not, but you can get totally, you know, emotional
[Guest]: and irrational if you met him.
[Guest]: So many of the people who are a little critical of my book for being, you know, because of
[Guest]: sort of puncturing this grand Vajpayee image, which I do, while at the same time saying
[Guest]: he was one of India's greatest prime ministers, but look, he was a human being and he was
[Guest]: a politician.
[Guest]: Are people who met him and people who've been blinded by that, right?
[Guest]: I have not, and I'm thankful for that because had I met Vajpayee, this book would definitely
[Guest]: have come across as a fanboy book, right?
[Guest]: I don't think India has had a greater political orator.
[Guest]: And I think part of the personal equation between Vajpayee and Advani was Advani was
[Guest]: a fanboy.
[Guest]: He was a fanboy of Vajpayee.
[Guest]: The second strand of that relationship was professional.
[Guest]: Something that we discussed earlier that Hindu nationalism needs a moderate, needs a hardliner,
[Guest]: needs an orator, needs an organizer, and both of them fitted that part.
[Guest]: And you know, when the mood of the nation was for moderation, Vajpayee was in front.
[Guest]: When the mood of the nation was for radicalism, Advani was propped in front.
[Guest]: And by the way, as an aside, Amit, I think that is the most remarkable part of the relationship
[Guest]: that in a country as hierarchical as India, you have a relationship that is able to switch
[Guest]: spots not once, but twice.
[Guest]: So it's like, you know, Obama now serving under Biden, Biden had served under Obama,
[Guest]: Obama now serving under Biden, and then a few years later, Biden once again serving
[Guest]: under Obama.
[Guest]: It's unthinkable.
[Guest]: But that's literally what Vajpayee and Advani did.
[Guest]: And that was also because they were professionally compatible, right?
[Guest]: In a way in which Advani and Murali Manohar Joshi were competing with the same spot, there
[Guest]: was no jugalbandi there.
[Guest]: That's why they didn't like each other.
[Guest]: Or Subramanian Swamy and Madhok were competing with the same spot as the face and voice of
[Guest]: Hindu nationalism as Vajpayee did, whereas Vajpayee and Advani were perfectly compatible
[Guest]: in a jugalbandi that is at least in part a requirement of Hindu nationalism, which is
[Guest]: both a party seeking political power as well as a social movement seeking to transform
[Guest]: society.
[Guest]: So it's like the communists in that respect.
[Guest]: And that's the second strand, professional compatibility.
[Guest]: The third strand, however, and that's like, literally, that's the taste that I want to
[Guest]: leave you with in the book is ideology, that it's a, it's a, it's an ideology that focuses
[Guest]: on teamwork.
[Guest]: And even when the things went so bad between Vajpayee and Advani, for Advani, it was, you
[Guest]: know, between 98 and 2004, when they were in power.
[Guest]: And for Vajpayee, it was between 1986 and 1993 or 1994, they never divorced.
[Guest]: So it was like one of these odd couples squabbling in the, in the park that you see, and you're
[Guest]: like, they're going to call the police, but they go home and cook for each other.
[Guest]: It's like that.
[Guest]: And what keeps that couple united is a deep ideological belief in the sanctity of marriage.
[Guest]: That's what these people had.
[Guest]: And a good sign of that is the end of the book, which, you know, I'm sorry, please read
[Guest]: the book.
[Guest]: Don't just see, hear the podcast.
[Guest]: But at the end, at Vajpayee's, you know, just after his funeral, Advani has to speak and
[Guest]: Advani could have deferred to Vajpayee, his 60 year relationship with Vajpayee in terms
[Guest]: of personality or in terms of personal chemistry or in terms of professional compatibility.
[Guest]: But he focuses on ideology.
[Guest]: He says that thinking about Vajpayee will help us live according to the ideology and
[Guest]: principles that the RSS has laid for us or words to that effect.
[Guest]: That's very telling.
[Guest]: Because even after all these decades, even after all the love, the warmth, the professional
[Guest]: compatibility, the marriage was kept together by an ideology.
[Amit Varma]: No, that's fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll go off on another sort of brief digression by something that you said, and something
[Amit Varma]: that you wrote.
[Amit Varma]: What you said was that you're glad you didn't meet Vajpayee because then you might have
[Amit Varma]: been biased by it.
[Amit Varma]: And this could have been a fanboy story.
[Amit Varma]: In your book, at one point, you also write about how Advani realizing consciously that
[Amit Varma]: he needs to woo English speaking journalists.
[Amit Varma]: And so he gets Swapandas Gupta and Chandan Mitra and so on into the fold.
[Amit Varma]: And since then, they've been complete fanboys.
[Amit Varma]: And equally, I know, sort of, quote unquote, liberal acquaintances of mine, who have been
[Amit Varma]: granted a meeting with Rahul Gandhi and suddenly their view just flipped and they are just
[Amit Varma]: in complete awe of the guy and no, no, he's not as dumb as you think he is and blah, blah,
[Amit Varma]: blah.
[Amit Varma]: So what happens like, you know, and I'm referring to sort of, if you have any observations about
[Amit Varma]: this human trait, that you meet this person in power, who's a public figure who is nice
[Amit Varma]: to you.
[Amit Varma]: And suddenly you just flip your independent thinking vanishes.
[Amit Varma]: I have seen this so often.
[Guest]: And it's just so bizarre.
[Guest]: It's the power of raw charisma.
[Guest]: This is what Max Weber said is a very key component of why politics works and boy did
[Guest]: Vajpayee have it.
[Guest]: You know, like Advani, I don't think you meet Advani, you say sincere man, you know, if
[Guest]: you like him, you know, like whatever educated man, but you know, you won't like with Vajpayee,
[Guest]: like, you know, journalists will go to talk to him.
[Guest]: Journalists have told me to talk to him about some political story, and he kind of turned
[Guest]: to the window and see, you know, barish suno and they go and for five minutes, listen to
[Guest]: the sound of the rain, you know, I mean, it's mesmerizing.
[Guest]: Absolutely mesmerizing, which is, and that, of course, at a personal level, at a political
[Guest]: level, Vajpayee's command over what to say, what not to say was an enormous political
[Guest]: tool.
[Guest]: Like to give you one example again, this charisma, he goes to Pakistan in the late nineties on
[Guest]: the bus, Lahore bus yatra, and he gives a speech in Pakistan to all the elites of Pakistan.
[Guest]: And he just totally floors them, both in the way he quotes Urdu and the way he speaks,
[Guest]: but also in like the sentences he uses.
[Guest]: So he gives the sentence and I quoted in the book, I'm saying it in English, which is,
[Guest]: he says that, you know, some people feel that by coming to Pakistan, I have put a mohar
[Guest]: or I put a stamp on their existence, right?
[Guest]: So that's the beautiful sentence, because what he's saying is, and the Pakistan audience
[Guest]: understands is that people in the RSS who believe in Akhand Bharat, who believe that
[Guest]: Pakistan should not exist in the first place, feel that by Vajpayee going there, that he
[Guest]: has put a seal on Pakistan, right?
[Guest]: But he never has to say it in that complicated way.
[Guest]: He actually George Orwell, you know, should use Vajpayee as an example, because he, you
[Guest]: know, he shows without telling, and then the next sentence is remarkable.
[Guest]: He says, I'm here to tell you that Pakistan's existence doesn't need a stamp from anybody.
[Guest]: And the crowd there goes bananas, because they get exactly what he's trying to say.
[Unknown]: At the same time, nobody in India makes a complaint, the RSS doesn't say anything, because
[Unknown]: at least formally the sentence seems okay, you know.
[Guest]: So this charisma that you're talking about is able to float people, charm parliament,
[Guest]: but it's also able to say things and not say things that is able to pay for the very different
[Guest]: and sometimes conflicting constituencies of Hindu nationalism.
[Amit Varma]: And how much of Vajpayee is Mukhota?
[Amit Varma]: Like how much of this is, do you think is your field is performative?
[Amit Varma]: And how much is sort of the real Vajpayee, because it seems to me at different points
[Amit Varma]: in your narrative, you get a sense of a man who does believe in certain things and is
[Amit Varma]: willing to stand up, like, for example, his relationship with Rajkumari when Golwalkar
[Amit Varma]: asked him to break that down, or even his sort of stubbornness towards like when he
[Amit Varma]: forms the BJP in 1980, and he's saying Gandhian socialism, and we won't talk about the other
[Amit Varma]: and he kind of abandons the Hindu vote, so to say what you would imagine, all of which,
[Amit Varma]: you know, then goes to the Congress and the RSS stops working for them, but he kind of
[Amit Varma]: sticks to his gun till the, you know, the election of 84, which is so disastrous.
[Amit Varma]: So I did get the sense through the book that there are certain core beliefs that he will
[Amit Varma]: not compromise on no matter what the politics.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit more about your sense of the man in those terms that between Mukhota
[Amit Varma]: and man, you know, what's happening there?
[Amit Varma]: Are there lines he will not cross?
[Guest]: So good question, I mean, then, you know, despite having spent three years and reading
[Guest]: everything he's written, I don't have an answer.
[Guest]: And that's something I learned, even when I worked with Narsimha Rao, that you think
[Guest]: you know, Narsimha Rao, I was focusing only on Narsimha Rao, and it was only a biography.
[Guest]: And even so, there were parts of him I didn't understand, you know, and I then began to
[Guest]: realize that, you know, if I think about my parents, or if I think about my wife, or I
[Guest]: think about my daughter, you know, I know them so well, sometimes they surprise you.
[Guest]: And I'm sure that your listeners and you also Amit, you think you know somebody very well.
[Guest]: And then sometimes you realize you don't know, there's parts to them that you can never quite
[Guest]: make out.
[Guest]: And even while writing it, I wanted to leave that, like human beings are not mathematical
[Guest]: equations where you figure them out, because they sometimes surprise you.
[Guest]: And at least I hope that with Advani and Vajpayee, I make them living and breathing, and you
[Unknown]: come away knowing something about them, but they also seem to have this ability to sometimes
[Guest]: surprise you, right.
[Guest]: So that's how I sort of told the story of Vajpayee, especially this sort of core conflict
[Guest]: that you talked about saying that, you know, is he really a moderate or is he putting on
[Guest]: a mask, right?
[Guest]: And at times, it seemed he was wearing a mask, at times, he seemed that, you know, his instincts
[Guest]: were liberal.
[Guest]: And I didn't fight that, I didn't try to paper that over, and I didn't try to kind of explain
[Guest]: it at the end.
[Guest]: Except to say that, you know, large and great personalities are complex figures.
[Unknown]: So they are like, Narsimha Rao, for example, had this deep vision for India, but was also
[Guest]: a corrupt man.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Corrupt man in the sense, he definitely bribed the GMM MPs, I provide evidence for that.
[Guest]: At the same time, he was a frugal man, the money wasn't for himself.
[Guest]: So you know, it's a complex, could be very petty to his family, Narsimha Rao, Gandhi,
[Unknown]: you know, he's not a good family man, didn't treat his sons very well.
[Guest]: At the same time, you know, this remarkable human being, you know, outside of his family.
[Guest]: And I think this desire to have just one answer I push against, and I push against because
[Guest]: I don't know, you know, and maybe if I spent even five years, more years on this book,
[Guest]: and only focused on Bajpayee, I may not have been able to get to the core of your answer.
[Guest]: Except to say that, I think in a lot of cases, Bajpayee's first instinct was, quote unquote,
[Guest]: liberal.
[Guest]: But that was accompanied by this worry or this anxiety, that he was always a guest artist
[Guest]: to the party.
[Unknown]: Right?
[Unknown]: So there is an element to that.
[Guest]: But there is a magic to human beings and there is a magical inconsistency to human beings
[Amit Varma]: that sometimes precludes me from answering a question like the one you asked.
[Amit Varma]: No, and in fact, it's quite possible that Bajpayee himself wouldn't be able to answer
[Amit Varma]: it because sometimes we are a mystery even to ourselves.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, one of the other tropes of my show, which keeps coming up is about how everyone
[Amit Varma]: contains multitudes.
[Amit Varma]: And the sort of the three Indian figures I always cite when I'm talking about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: how true that statement is, is Mahatma Gandhi, Nehru and Vajpayee.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it was very sad when Vajpayee died recently that the response on social media,
[Amit Varma]: especially was so polarized that either he was, you know, the best Prime Minister we
[Amit Varma]: ever had.
[Amit Varma]: And there is some truth to that.
[Amit Varma]: Or he was, you know, a Hindu nationalist demagogue who was just othering Muslims.
[Amit Varma]: And there is a little bit of truth to that as well.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, before we move on to talking about the Bharatiya Jansangh, you know, that
[Amit Varma]: first leg of the political movement where Vajpayee and Advani are really together.
[Amit Varma]: One final question on Advani per se, because one of the interesting bits of trivia that
[Amit Varma]: struck me from your book is that he was also a sort of a part-time film critic.
[Amit Varma]: And that he wrote film reviews for the magazine, The Organizer.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, at one point when, you know, he criticized Richard Attenberg's Gandhi,
[Amit Varma]: because he said that why are foreigners making a film on Gandhi, aren't Indians good enough
[Amit Varma]: to do it?
[Amit Varma]: And that led to a tangential question, which is neither about Advani nor about cinema,
[Amit Varma]: but more about sort of protectionism and the Swadeshi Jagran Manch kind of sentiment that
[Amit Varma]: foreign things are bad, Indian things are good.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, the economic logic behind that is complete rubbish.
[Amit Varma]: But I've come to realize that the point of that sentiment is that insular protectionist
[Amit Varma]: sentiment is not even so much sort of economic, though there is, of course, a political logic
[Amit Varma]: of it that your base of small traders will want to be protected from imports and all
[Amit Varma]: that, but is also in a sense, psychological, and it's this distrust and resentment and
[Amit Varma]: hatred of the other who comes from outside because of, you know, these centuries of colonization
[Amit Varma]: and invasion and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: To what extent do you think that what is otherwise a sort of an economic position in the modern
[Amit Varma]: world comes from this deep rooted psychological insecurity?
[Guest]: Just two points on that.
[Guest]: Before we talk about Janasang and BJP and the economic question, you know, you mentioned
[Guest]: that Advani was a film critic, he was a full time film critic.
[Guest]: And just as an interesting anecdote, for those of you who want to do research after this,
[Unknown]: that in Advani's own memoir, I think I read, if my memory serves right, that, you know,
[Guest]: he had spent some time with the organizer and he had a pen named Netraj, N-E-T-R-A.
[Unknown]: So then, of course, my researcher mindset, let me go and find these articles, which was
[Guest]: a huge pain because we're looking at articles written in the 1960s.
[Unknown]: So I went to this archive, that archive, and in the 1960s and all is not digitized, it's
[Unknown]: you know, it's a physical thing and you have to kind of open it, some of it is a microfilm.
[Unknown]: So it's a lot of effort.
[Guest]: But then I was able to pick out that some of, you know, Netraj's criticisms, including
[Unknown]: like saying that, you know, when you want to make a film on Gandhi, why are we going
[Unknown]: to Richard Attenborough, right?
[Unknown]: It would eventually, a decade later come out as a film, but even then he was criticizing
[Guest]: this.
[Guest]: So, you know, this, this is a part about this process that I quite like, you get a clue
[Guest]: somewhere, you know, I used to read Shalakum as a kid.
[Guest]: So maybe I just, you know, if I can't do the real thing, I do like the fake thing, which
[Guest]: is a researcher's Shalakum, which is, you get a tip like this, then you go to one library,
[Guest]: you go to another library, you go to a microfilm and, you know, this, just doing that one sentence,
[Guest]: finding out a couple of his reviews took me a lot of time, but it was worth it, you know,
[Guest]: because it's someone like you will, you will read it and you'll immediately notice it and
[Guest]: use, and it's a show don't tell, like, don't tell me that Advani was a reviewer, you know,
[Guest]: write some of the, you know, quote him giving some of those reviews that itself gives you
[Guest]: something about the man, right?
[Guest]: So the, thank you for noticing that because otherwise a week could have been wasted, right?
[Guest]: But the larger question you ask is about this instinct of protectionism that Hindu nationalism
[Guest]: has, let me push back a little bit against that Amit, because I spent a lot of time in
[Guest]: the book arguing that Hindu nationalism doesn't really have a theory of what to do once you
[Guest]: have state power.
[Guest]: So it has this theory on how you get state power in a democracy by uniting Hindus, othering
[Guest]: Muslims, etc, etc, etc.
[Guest]: But if you say, what is the Hindu nationalist view on foreign policy, on economics, on welfare
[Guest]: scheme, it doesn't have it.
[Guest]: You have Hindu nationalists over time, who have expressed views on it.
[Guest]: So just like you have Arun Shourie, who is a strong pro marketer, who I would call a
[Guest]: Hindu nationalist, you know, broadly, even though he's currently fighting with the institution,
[Guest]: his cultural critiques, etc, etc, on Marxism, or against reservation, all of that have Hindu
[Guest]: nationalist elements to it.
[Guest]: At the same time, you have his former close friend, Gurumurthy, who was, you know, with
[Guest]: the Swadeshi Jagran Manch.
[Guest]: Much earlier, as I point out in the book itself, you have Subramanian Swamy and Balraj Madho,
[Guest]: who wanted a frontal assault on Indira Gandhi's socialism.
[Guest]: But you have Deep Dayal Upadhyaya and Vajpayee who push against it, and they push against
[Guest]: it not for ideological reasons, but they feel that the Indian voter was actually not free
[Guest]: market at that time.
[Guest]: So even if they were rejecting Indira Gandhi, they were not rejecting the Nehruvian consensus.
[Guest]: And that tells you, in the book itself, that on this, there's plenty of diversity within
[Guest]: Hindu nationalism.
[Guest]: So even this protectionist instinct that you talk about, is not in evidence when they come
[Guest]: to power.
[Guest]: I mean, I would argue and the book does argue that Yashwant Sinha and Jaiswant Singh, who
[Guest]: were the finance ministers of the Vajpayee government between 98 and 2004, were the most
[Guest]: kind of anti-statist, pro market finance ministers India has had, and I would say that, you know,
[Guest]: and maybe this is betraying my own ideological impulses, so feel free to disagree with you,
[Guest]: that did India a lot of good in those years, you know, between 98 and 2000.
[Guest]: Once again, you know, I even when I teach, I say, the few times I show you my cards,
[Guest]: I wanted to be clear to the listener that there are other cards that one can play, you
[Guest]: know.
[Guest]: So that's a complex answer to this question that the protectionist instinct is not embedded
[Guest]: in Hindu nationalism.
[Guest]: It's just not.
[Guest]: If you look at the thinkers, if you look at the actions, and therefore to answer the question,
[Guest]: why is Narendra Modi's economic policy the way it is, don't look at Hindu nationalism.
[Guest]: Don't look at Savarkar.
[Guest]: Look at Narendra Modi.
[Guest]: Look at the circumstances.
[Guest]: If you want to understand demonetization, don't read like Dindayal Upadhyay, right?
[Guest]: So the ideology does some things for you.
[Guest]: And that's very important.
[Guest]: For example, you can't understand what Narendra Modi and Amit Shah have done on Article 370
[Guest]: without knowing that the Jan Sangh right from the fifties itself has said in the constitution,
[Guest]: in their manifesto, if we come to power, this is what we'll do.
[Guest]: The Citizenship Amendment Act and the NRC again, is based on this ideological obsession
[Guest]: with demographics.
[Guest]: So to understand those actions of the Modi government or the Vajpayee government, definitely
[Guest]: look to ideology.
[Guest]: But the Hindu nationalist ideology is silent on 90% of things we, you and me would call
[Guest]: governance, right?
[Guest]: So there may be individual RSS heads who have a view on it, like Sudarshan did, who was
[Guest]: kind of left-wing on economics and Dattopan Thegdi, again, RSS man who founded India's
[Guest]: largest trade union.
[Guest]: But there are plenty of others within Hindu nationalism who don't agree with that.
[Guest]: That's what makes it remarkable to Amit that on a lot of intellectual areas, it's actually
[Guest]: a broad tent that as long as you don't defeat the party, split the party, you're actually
[Guest]: allowed to have various kinds of views within it.
[Amit Varma]: No, that's a fair point.
[Amit Varma]: And you've revealed your cards.
[Amit Varma]: But I'll also at this point, reveal my cards and point out that the two central figures
[Amit Varma]: of your two biographies, Narasimha Rao and Vajpayee are in my mind, the best prime ministers
[Amit Varma]: we've had by far.
[Amit Varma]: But here I would again, sort of not exactly push back, but just state a thought that comes
[Amit Varma]: to my mind that if you, you know, Jaswant and Yashwant were good finance ministers,
[Amit Varma]: but they were not from the RSS.
[Amit Varma]: They were sort of outsiders.
[Amit Varma]: Jaswant really, you know, came from the Swatantra party and Yashwant Sinha was an earlier finance
[Amit Varma]: minister for another government.
[Amit Varma]: And the RSS, like you pointed out about how in the 80s, because the RSS felt that the
[Amit Varma]: BJP was ignoring the Hindu vote, you know, they reset up the Vishwa Hindu Parishad in
[Amit Varma]: a sense.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, in 91, when liberalization happened, because they felt that the BJP wasn't
[Amit Varma]: strong enough in voicing their opposition to it, they set up the Swadeshi Jagran Manch.
[Amit Varma]: So at least from the RSS point of view, you know, there seems to be some continuity.
[Amit Varma]: And it struck me that this might come not from economic ideology, being pro free markets
[Amit Varma]: or against them or whatever, but just a distrust of foreigners in general.
[Amit Varma]: But yeah, but I mean, that's just kind of me thinking aloud.
[Amit Varma]: Let's, do you want to respond to that?
[Guest]: I mean, I don't know, because, you know, look, there's definitely a nativist instinct in
[Guest]: the RSS.
[Guest]: The question is, to what extent does it, is it articulated in policy?
[Guest]: That's what we really care about.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: And I'm like, don't look there.
[Unknown]: But look, during the Vajpayee government, Amit, there are many other areas where you
[Guest]: can see the imprint on the RSS, for example, on teaching of history, right?
[Guest]: Actually, RSS didn't care really about that the foreign minister wasn't from the RSS,
[Guest]: but they wanted Rudlimanav Joshi to be the education or HRD minister.
[Unknown]: They care about it, right?
[Guest]: Equally, when it came to telecom and roads, I point out, the RSS supported it, because
[Unknown]: just like the RSS support for GST, it supports the vision of a united India, unity, remember,
[Unknown]: that's the core idea, territorial and cultural unity.
[Guest]: So you have to think of it in those terms, right?
[Guest]: Because when you spend a lot of time thinking about the RSS as these anti-Dalvian protectionists,
[Guest]: and then you end up with two prime ministers who whatever else you say, that's not the
[Unknown]: frame in which you think about them.
[Guest]: So when they have come to power, that's not the frame in which they have operated, right?
[Guest]: And even today, you know, on the disputes that the RSS, the Swadeshi Jagrand Manch or
[Guest]: the RSS trade unions are having with the Modi government, you know, on let's say on some
[Guest]: of the economic reforms that they're trying to do.
[Guest]: It's not that Mohan Bhagwat is taking the side of the Swadeshi Jagrand Manch against
[Guest]: Modi.
[Amit Varma]: He's like, look, this is a family, figure it out, you know, which is a healthy attitude,
[Amit Varma]: frankly.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: And to sort of buttress your point about Modi, there's clearly no ideology there like I did
[Amit Varma]: this episode with Pooja Mehra, who's written the book called The Lost Decade, which, you
[Amit Varma]: know, describes in very fine detail how everything that Modi did in government was shaped by
[Amit Varma]: political imperatives when, you know, he was with a jibe of a suit boot, the government
[Amit Varma]: was thrown at him and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And he figured that economic reforms would not sell with the public.
[Amit Varma]: He instantly kind of moved away from it and went into status populist directions as it
[Amit Varma]: were.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you know, we'll take a quick commercial break now.
[Amit Varma]: And when we come back, I want to talk a lot more about sort of those two legs of the political
[Amit Varma]: journey of this great Jugal Banti, first, the Bharatiya Jan Sangh and then finally,
[Amit Varma]: the Bharatiya Janata Party.
[Amit Varma]: So see you after a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: On the scene and the unseen, I often speak about positive sum games.
[Amit Varma]: Well, if you want to be surrounded by beauty, and you love fine art, I have a win win proposition
[Amit Varma]: for you.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to Indiancolors.com Indian Colors licenses images of fine art from some of the
[Amit Varma]: best contemporary artists in India and adapts them to objects of everyday use like tote
[Amit Varma]: bags, pouches and home decor items.
[Amit Varma]: You get to surround yourself with the finest modern Indian art at affordable prices and
[Amit Varma]: artists get royalties for every product you buy.
[Amit Varma]: Win win game.
[Amit Varma]: The Indian Colors new range is in and includes elegant yet comfortable dresses for women
[Amit Varma]: and casual shirts for men with standout motifs by artists such as Tanmoy Samanta, Manisha
[Amit Varma]: Ghera Baswari, Shruti Nelson, Pradeep Mishra, and Jaideep Mehrotra.
[Amit Varma]: Stay home, but dress smart.
[Amit Varma]: And if you're missing your friends in these lockdown days, worry not, you can show them
[Amit Varma]: you're thinking of them by buying gifts for them from Indian Colors.
[Amit Varma]: Corporate gifting is also available.
[Amit Varma]: So head on over to Indiancolors.com as Colors with an OU and make art a part of your life.
[Amit Varma]: And hey, for a 15% discount, use the code unseen.
[Amit Varma]: That's right.
[Amit Varma]: Unseen for 15% off at Indiancolors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Vinay Sitapati on his marvelous book Jugalbandi, the BJP before Modi.
[Amit Varma]: And now, you know, we've spoken about sort of the background of Hindu nationalism and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, all the different conditions which lead to it sort of coming to being.
[Amit Varma]: We spoken about the different personalities of Advani and Vajpayee and the relationship
[Amit Varma]: between them.
[Amit Varma]: I want to speak now a little bit about the Bhartiya Jansangh.
[Amit Varma]: You know, we spoke about how it originated because after the assassination of Mahatma
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi, when the RSS was sort of thrust into the wilderness and demonized and banned for
[Amit Varma]: a few months, they realized that we need to have a political voice.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, Golwalkar, despite being initially hesitant, said, okay, let's go for it and
[Amit Varma]: supplied his RSS pracharaks and his RSS people to this new party led by Shyama Prasad Mukherjee.
[Amit Varma]: And then, you know, who dies young, so at 51, so, and there's an interesting counterfactual
[Amit Varma]: there.
[Amit Varma]: And if we have time, I'll ask you about those.
[Amit Varma]: But then Vajpayee and Advani take over the party.
[Amit Varma]: Now this, the next phase that happens is very interesting to me, because what you point
[Amit Varma]: out is that for about 15 to 18 years, they have to function within what you call the
[Amit Varma]: Nehruvian consensus.
[Amit Varma]: So what do you mean by that?
[Amit Varma]: And tell me a little bit about what it implies and which are the areas where Vajpayee and
[Amit Varma]: Advani feel that they can compromise, because they have to go with the temper of the times
[Amit Varma]: and which are the areas that are so core to them, that they never compromise on those?
[Guest]: Amit, I think the Nehruvian consensus, the way I use it in the book, has three pillars.
[Guest]: Pillar one, which is the most controversial pillar is the relationship between the state
[Guest]: and Hinduism.
[Guest]: Now, I don't want to say the sentence Nehru was anti-Hindu, I mean, the BJP says that
[Guest]: all the time.
[Guest]: I don't think that's right.
[Guest]: But Nehru certainly was worried that a Hindu majority country, where the majority of Hindus
[Guest]: were religious Hindus, it wasn't just they were Hindus by name only, there was a threat
[Guest]: that the religion would enter the state.
[Guest]: So just speaking descriptively, objectively, without any value judgment, Nehru definitely
[Guest]: intervened in Hinduism, much more than he intervened in other religions.
[Guest]: This is the codification of Hindu law, for example.
[Guest]: The other thing that the BJP talks about all the time, which is that, why is Tirupati temple
[Guest]: run by three IAS officers?
[Guest]: This of course is long standing, but it is a grouse that they have that, why has nationalization
[Guest]: of temples taken place and not other religions?
[Guest]: I think part of the reason was that Nehru felt that this force had to be controlled.
[Guest]: Otherwise, it would go against his modernizing experiment and part of it was that he felt
[Guest]: that he was a Hindu.
[Guest]: So as a Hindu, he had the right and the legitimacy to intervene in Hindu affairs, especially
[Guest]: because Hinduism doesn't have an authoritative church or an authoritative text.
[Guest]: So the modern Nehruvian state became the vehicle for speaking and reforming Hinduism, right,
[Guest]: which is the BJP and the Jansans counter to that has always been, but Nehru is not really
[Guest]: a Hindu.
[Guest]: But Nehru believed that.
[Guest]: On the other hand, he did not think, especially when it came to dealing with post-partition
[Guest]: Muslims that he had the same legitimacy or the Congress party had the same legitimacy
[Guest]: to deal with Muslim affairs.
[Guest]: On hindsight, you can say that he was being a little short-sighted because even though
[Guest]: he had a, you know, I wouldn't say noble, but he had a pretty idealistic aim here.
[Guest]: It has been, you know, it does expose that the state has not been even handed when it
[Guest]: comes to religion and it has definitely given the BJP an issue from an issue where there
[Guest]: was none.
[Guest]: And I think those of your listeners who don't like the BJP, I think the first thing you
[Guest]: should do is to admit this and then to say, but so what, you know, and this was his particular
[Guest]: logic.
[Guest]: So I think that's the first pillar of the Nehruvian consensus, which is that a particular
[Guest]: worry that Hinduism and traditional Hinduism should stay out of the state.
[Guest]: Nehru, of course, didn't have a worry that Islam would enter the Indian state because
[Guest]: Muslims were a minority, but he did have this special worry when it came to Hinduism.
[Guest]: Second Amit, and you know, I'm, I'm a fan of your podcast enough to know that the second
[Guest]: pillar is something you don't like, which is the role of the state in the economy, in
[Guest]: society, the, you know, big brother, you know, can see all, knows all.
[Guest]: That was a modernizing impulse that, you know, the Madhav Khosla, who's been on your podcast
[Guest]: before, you know, made it quite clear to your listeners that Nehru's and Ambedkar's idea
[Guest]: of the constitution was premised on the fact that they thought traditional Indian society
[Guest]: was incapable of liberal democracy.
[Guest]: And so the constitution would be this transformative, you know, and a teaching tool to teach Indians
[Guest]: to understand liberal secular democracy.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So that I think was the second pillar of the Nehruvian state, which is that a belief that
[Guest]: the modern state will be the vehicle for transformation of the Indian economy and, and society.
[Guest]: A third pillar, which had to do more with temperament than policy was this belief that
[Guest]: you must respect the protocols of democracy.
[Guest]: You must mean, you know, respect constitutional functionaries.
[Guest]: You must respect those, you know, who you actually have power over to give you just
[Guest]: one example, Nehru was remarkably courteous to his chief ministers, the chief ministers
[Guest]: during that time, even though, especially after 1950, Nehru completely controlled the
[Guest]: Congress party and the chief ministers were totally beholden to him yet, as you can see
[Guest]: from his letters to chief ministers, he was very respectful of that.
[Guest]: So these were the three pillars of the Nehruvian consensus, a particular worry that Hinduism
[Guest]: would take over the state.
[Guest]: Let me put that in the most neutral way possible, a belief that the state, the heavy handed
[Guest]: state would, from the commanding heights, not just transform the economy, but transform
[Guest]: Indian society.
[Guest]: And third is a temperament in which you respected constitutional functionaries, you know, even
[Guest]: when Nehru disagreed with the Supreme Court, as I think Tripu Dhaman Singh was already
[Guest]: come on your podcast.
[Guest]: I just feel that when I answer your questions, I also answer, you know, half your podcast
[Guest]: listeners come through.
[Guest]: But I think that was the third aspect of it, which is that he was, you know, he treated
[Guest]: even the Supreme Court with some respect, he was careful about what he said.
[Guest]: So he exemplified this larger democratic temperament.
[Guest]: Now, Vajpayee and Advani sort of come on to the national stage at a time when two things
[Guest]: are happening, which is giving, putting them on the defensive, which is forcing them to
[Guest]: play back foot.
[Guest]: One is that the Nehruvian consensus is completely dominant in parliament.
[Guest]: And I don't just mean with the Congress party, you know, I think that's a mistake, you know,
[Guest]: for people to see that even the non-Congress opposition bought many of the principles of
[Guest]: the Nehruvian consensus.
[Guest]: So you can say that Rajaji and the Swatantra party, you know, had a slight departure when
[Guest]: it came to the role of the state in the economy, but many of the other precepts he agreed.
[Guest]: So I would say that most of the parliamentary opposition to the Congress party agreed with
[Guest]: about 70 to 80% of the Nehruvian consensus.
[Guest]: It was that powerful.
[Guest]: And today, when you see a Modi consensus or a Narsimha consensus in India, I think people
[Guest]: will find it very hard to remember how much of a colossus Nehru was both in parliament
[Guest]: and in India.
[Guest]: You know, today they all say, oh, he's a, you know, UP Brahmin or a Kashmiri Brahmin
[Guest]: who sort of moved to UP, what's his social base?
[Guest]: Is he like Lalu Yadav?
[Guest]: I mean, he had a national base and he really stood out as the hope of post-independent
[Guest]: India.
[Guest]: And I am critical of him in the book saying that, you know, his self-conscious elitism
[Guest]: has brought the Congress party where it is today.
[Guest]: So there's something conceptual in that idea, but nonetheless, he was a colossus.
[Guest]: So Vajpayee and Advani had to deal with that and Vajpayee in particular, and Vajpayee therefore
[Guest]: adopted the Nehruvian consensus because that's what it meant to be respectable in parliament.
[Guest]: And as we've discussed before, Vajpayee, the thing he cared about the most was speaking
[Guest]: in parliament, charming the opposition.
[Guest]: He didn't really care who ran the party and he was very happy for Advani to do that.
[Guest]: So that was the first impact on Vajpayee, the Nehruvian consensus.
[Guest]: The second reason why the Jansangh of that period, now which is the Prakasa party to
[Guest]: the BJP had to fall within the Nehruvian consensus was the murder of Mahatma Gandhi.
[Guest]: As we discussed earlier, the Jansangh or Hindu nationalism more generally was on the ascendant
[Guest]: after partition because what the Hindu Mahasabha and the RSS had been complaining about Gandhi
[Guest]: and the Congress all this while, namely that the appeasement of the Muslim League would
[Guest]: result in the breakage of India actually happened.
[Guest]: And we don't have evidence for this in terms of elections.
[Guest]: But if you just look at the increase in enrollment of Hindu Mahasabha, increase in enrollment
[Guest]: of RSS between August 1947 and February 1948, which is when Gandhi is assassinated, it's
[Guest]: definitely on the ascendant and people I speak to within the RSS and the Jansangh of that
[Guest]: period really felt that this was their chance, that we had an 80% Hindu majority, half the
[Guest]: Muslim population, no Britishers, this was their chance.
[Guest]: The murder of the Mahatma, who was the leader of Hindus, ironically made the RSS and Hindu
[Guest]: Mahasabha seem like a party that was opposed to the interest of the vast majority of moderate
[Guest]: Hindus.
[Guest]: And so, I mean, the RSS was banned, Hindu Mahasabha wasn't banned, but every time there
[Guest]: was an election, you know, whoever was opposing the Jansangh candidate would bring up saying
[Guest]: that they have the blood of Gandhi on their hands, right?
[Guest]: And as I point out, that's not, the evidence is not there.
[Guest]: So they always had the sense that they had to mainstream themselves and it took them
[Guest]: a very long time.
[Guest]: And the way to mainstream themselves, Amit, was to basically fall within the Nehruvian
[Guest]: consensus on which 80 to 90% didn't disagree.
[Guest]: They did disagree on the role of Hinduism in the state, but that was something they
[Guest]: downplayed in the initial years.
[Guest]: The third thing, Amit, that aided them in falling into the Nehruvian consensus is something
[Guest]: that we discussed earlier, which is that on 80% of issues we call governance, Hindu nationalism
[Guest]: doesn't really have a view.
[Guest]: So when it came to foreign policy of Nehru, non-aligned movement, when it came to his
[Guest]: economics, sure, you know, individual Jansangh members like Balraj Madhok had problems, Subramaniam
[Guest]: Swami had a problem, but they couldn't rely on ideology to make that case and that made
[Guest]: it much easier for Atal Bihari Vajpayee to go with that.
[Guest]: And as evidence of that point that I give you is that once the central hall of parliament,
[Guest]: which is sort of the heart of where the gossip and the chai is drunk in parliament, when
[Guest]: that consensus changes after Narsimha Rao, especially with regard to the relationship
[Guest]: between the state and the economy, Vajpayee changes too, you know, and that tells you
[Guest]: that he doesn't have deep views on this.
[Guest]: He just wants to go with whatever makes common sense in parliament.
[Guest]: So that's the, you know, the relationship between Vajpayee and the Nehruvian consensus.
[Guest]: The reason I'm giving you a long answer to this, Amit, is too many both admirers of Vajpayee
[Guest]: as well as his right-wing detractors used to say, look, he's half a congressman, you
[Guest]: know, he was bedazzled by the charm of Nehru.
[Guest]: That's not the case at all.
[Guest]: He was a wily politician.
[Guest]: He understood very clearly that Nehru was the consensus and he didn't want to break
[Guest]: from the consensus.
[Guest]: And that's also why the RSS supported Vajpayee when it came to these quote-unquote left-wing
[Guest]: views.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, one like there is something in this journey of Vajpayee and his strategy
[Amit Varma]: towards sort of dealing with politics that comes down all the way to the present day
[Amit Varma]: to the, you know, even the way Modi and Amit Shah approach politics, which is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: again, as you pointed out in your book, you know, in the first elections, the Jansangh
[Amit Varma]: perhaps, partly because of Shama Prasad Mukherjee's charisma and all that, get 3.06% of the vote,
[Amit Varma]: but that's more than Hindu Mahasabha and Ram Rajya Party.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, the Bharatiya Jansangh automatically becomes the primary Hindu party, so to say.
[Amit Varma]: Now, one, you've pointed out how because of the political imperative of fitting within
[Amit Varma]: the Nehruvian consensus, you know, they sort of moderate themselves.
[Amit Varma]: But even later at different points in time, like one of the really fascinating parts of
[Amit Varma]: the book is how the political wind is influencing Vajpayee.
[Amit Varma]: And for example, you know, after the VHP comes up in 1964, and you have anti-cow slaughter
[Amit Varma]: becoming an issue, they used that in the 1967 elections, a pivot towards that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: with Vijay Rajesh India being a major patron of the party.
[Amit Varma]: And in that elections, they have the second largest vote share after the Congress, but
[Amit Varma]: third in terms of seats.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, then you point out about how Vajpayee, which, you know, fans of his prime
[Amit Varma]: ministership may recoil a bit to see this, but he supported the bank nationalizations
[Amit Varma]: of Indira Gandhi and many of the economic policies, because that's the way the political
[Amit Varma]: wind was blowing.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm struck by this very interesting article you cite, which was written in 1971, which
[Amit Varma]: Vajpayee wrote, but under the sort of pen name of Urs William Sewak, where he spoke
[Amit Varma]: about the need to balance ideology and power and to realize that if you wanted to go with
[Amit Varma]: power, you had to, at some levels in the political sphere, compromise on ideology.
[Amit Varma]: And you speak about how, you know, when Golwalkar reads this, he realizes pen name or no pen
[Amit Varma]: name only Vajpayee can write like this and he calls Vajpayee over to chat with him.
[Amit Varma]: And he realizes that Vajpayee in a sense is right, that the RSS needs to take a step back
[Amit Varma]: and, you know, let Vajpayee kind of go down this route.
[Amit Varma]: Now, this sort of leads me to this larger question that even in modern times, and this
[Amit Varma]: is a question I've had, that on the one hand, we see the BJP today taking Hindutva almost
[Amit Varma]: to its logical sort of conclusion, where many of the things that they aimed for in that
[Amit Varma]: period of time, like the building of temple and the abolition of 370 and all that is gradually
[Amit Varma]: being achieved, but at the same time, there is, again, a trade off to be made between
[Amit Varma]: pure ideology and the will to power, so to say, which Amit Shah exemplifies.
[Amit Varma]: So on the one hand, you see this ideological purity, which is finding more expression.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand, you also have a will to power where, for example, under Amit Shah,
[Amit Varma]: they'll do what I would call in the political sphere, mergers and acquisitions, where they'll
[Amit Varma]: buy 50 MPs from this party or, you know, co-op leaders from some other party, and all of
[Amit Varma]: that.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, in this balance, in this trade off between politics and ideology, where,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Vajpayee realized that you have to, you know, you can't go too far towards
[Amit Varma]: ideology, politics has to reign supreme, you have to respond to the incentives and the
[Amit Varma]: atmosphere of the time, which is why relative liberalizers of the 70s, like Balraj Madhok
[Amit Varma]: and Subramanian Swamy were eventually sidelined.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, if we look at the party today, for example, how do you view this trade off?
[Amit Varma]: Does a party risk losing its soul, so to say, if it compromises too much for political purposes,
[Amit Varma]: like we can look at parties like the Congress and all and say they have no soul at all,
[Amit Varma]: so it doesn't really matter.
[Amit Varma]: But the BJP is a firmly ideological party, and yet it is this will to power and the accumulated
[Amit Varma]: organizational wisdom of a century that has got them to where they are today?
[Guest]: Well, I mean, that's a deep question, right?
[Guest]: And first up, I want to remind your listeners that, you know, I don't think anyone has read
[Guest]: the book as carefully as Amit, but that doesn't mean you only hear this podcast and not buy
[Guest]: the book.
[Guest]: That's what I'm worried about, Amit, because you've read it so carefully that, you know,
[Guest]: the reader may feel, you know, why should we buy the book, please buy the book, it's
[Guest]: available on Amazon.
[Guest]: No matter how closely and in detail Amit has read the book, it's not a substitute to buying
[Guest]: the book.
[Guest]: So I must put an advertisement, Amit, because, you know, you know everything about the book.
[Amit Varma]: So I have to.
[Amit Varma]: I second, I second that and in the sense I second your recommendation, and I have to
[Amit Varma]: point out that my listeners, you know, there is a meme on Twitter where people have seen
[Amit Varma]: in the unseen bookshelves with all the books I've bought because of my episodes.
[Amit Varma]: So don't worry about that.
[Amit Varma]: Everybody's going to go out and buy the beautiful book.
[Amit Varma]: But let's let's.
[Guest]: Thanks.
[Guest]: Thanks, Amit.
[Guest]: Well, so look, here's why the question you ask is deep, right, which is that at the heart
[Guest]: of Hindu nationalism is, you know, you call it will to power and ideology, right?
[Guest]: Let me call it it's a conventional party seating power, which is your will to power argument.
[Guest]: And two is it's a, you know, it's an ideological movement radically seeking to reshape society.
[Guest]: And there is this tension.
[Guest]: And this tension is always on yin and yang.
[Guest]: So I wouldn't say that there's a, you know, we discussed this earlier, there's no, you
[Guest]: know, movement towards radicalism necessarily that, you know, the nature of India is always
[Guest]: you are moderate Hindus, you are radical Hindus, you know, you have plenty of people who don't
[Guest]: think of themselves as Hindus, that a political party that you know, wins enormously, the
[Guest]: word enormous only means less than 50%.
[Guest]: So I think the highest vote share any Prime Minister has got is Rajiv Gandhi in 1984 on
[Guest]: the back of his mother's murder, and even he got less than one in two voters, right?
[Guest]: So you always have some other party, you know, the opposition, you have adequate unity, then
[Guest]: that puts the you know, BJP or the Congress on the back burner and then forces you to
[Guest]: be moderate to try to get allies.
[Guest]: So the dynamic that you talk about, right, is a yin and yang is an up and down, right?
[Guest]: It's never moving towards one particular direction.
[Guest]: To give you one just one example, when it came to the Citizenship Amendment Act, there's
[Guest]: a reason I think that it was Amit Shah who presented it.
[Guest]: And if my memory serves, and I think your listeners can check that Narendra Modi made
[Guest]: sure that he wasn't in parliament, you know, because he wanted to, you know, it was so
[Guest]: radical, right?
[Guest]: And he was afraid what the press what the foreign press would say, that Modi wanted
[Guest]: to appear moderate, right?
[Guest]: Now, Modi is not more moderate than Amit Shah, they both are cut off the same cloth.
[Guest]: But that that the point being that the ideology of Hindu nationalism itself needs this jugalbandi,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Which is why right in the beginning, you see the jugalbandi of Shyam Prashad Mukherjee
[Guest]: and Dindya Lopadia, you can call it moderate and hardline, but the other way you can see
[Guest]: it is one cares about the ideology, the other cares about what you call will to power, right?
[Guest]: It's true that the BJP under Modi is able to kind of break political parties, but the
[Guest]: ability of Vajpayee to reach out to parties in return like AIDMK wanted very opportunistic
[Guest]: things that that predates Amit Shah and Modi.
[Guest]: So this is a I mean, it's a good question that you asked, because the answer to this
[Guest]: puzzle is jugalbandi, right?
[Guest]: That jugalbandi provides a team ethic of teamwork, where given that you have this inevitable
[Guest]: yin and yang, this radical, this moderate, this hardline, you know, soft line, you need
[Guest]: to stick it together.
[Guest]: Because in many other parties, when this happens, Amit, you end up with a split.
[Guest]: So the other party, for example, where this happens very often is the Communist Party,
[Guest]: which is both a movement seeking to reshape society as well as, you know, at least after
[Guest]: the 1950s, tactically a believer in bourgeois democracy.
[Guest]: But and you did like have some kind of this dynamic, I think you had when Jyoti Basu was
[Guest]: in his height of his power in Bengal, you had Jyoti Basu running the government and
[Guest]: I think you had Pramod Das Gupta running the party, again, the same dynamic.
[Guest]: But you know, while that jugalbandi stayed, the communists in general have been plagued
[Guest]: by a lot of splits.
[Guest]: The biggest split Amit is between overground and underground.
[Guest]: So if you look at the Communist Party in India in Bihar at the moment, a lot of people were
[Guest]: surprised that the Communist Party did unusually well in the in the results last month.
[Guest]: But you know, it has a very old history in Bihar.
[Guest]: In fact, I think it's produced Communist Party CPI MLAs from Patna itself, I think Dr. Sen.
[Guest]: So it has a whole history, but it would have done even better if it had been able to solve
[Guest]: this very dynamic that you identify in Hindu nationalism, when the underground and overground
[Guest]: get together.
[Guest]: Why did the CPI split into CPM and the CPM has split into the Maoists because they simply,
[Guest]: you know, they could not accommodate the radicals.
[Guest]: They just couldn't, right.
[Guest]: And there the definition of radical is that you believe in taking up arms against the
[Guest]: state.
[Guest]: And I think it has hurt the communist movement hugely, you know, the splits and this constant
[Guest]: anxiety about whether you should be underground or overground, I think the underground movement
[Guest]: has given a bad name to the overground communists.
[Guest]: So the dynamic that you talk about is not peculiar to the BJP, because it happens in
[Guest]: many parties that are also movements.
[Guest]: The solution to that problem is peculiar to the to the BJP.
[Amit Varma]: So let's kind of move on to, you know, what is the big rupture, you know, in the politics
[Amit Varma]: of the Hindu nationalist movement and a big rupture in Indian politics as well, which
[Amit Varma]: is the emergency where, you know, so many opposition leaders get jailed.
[Amit Varma]: And what you see during that time is that all of these parties, you know, from Jayprakash
[Amit Varma]: Narayan on where he stands in the spectrum and Vajpayee and so on are like, let's leave
[Amit Varma]: everything aside.
[Amit Varma]: Let's just unite.
[Amit Varma]: And it's pure will to power there more than ideology.
[Amit Varma]: And they all come together and you point out about how after the emergency, when the coalition
[Amit Varma]: wins power, you know, the Bharatiya Jan Sangh realizes that we have the most seats of all
[Amit Varma]: the parties, but we won't make a bid for PM.
[Amit Varma]: And there are, of course, three candidates, Murarji Desai, Charan Singh and Jagjivan Ram.
[Amit Varma]: And again, it's sort of the strategic astuteness of Vajpayee that, you know, he supports Jagjivan
[Amit Varma]: Ram because his thinking is Jagjivan Ram is a Harijan and therefore, this whole project
[Amit Varma]: of expanding the Hindu vote to include, you know, all castes and so on will be helped
[Amit Varma]: if Jagjivan Ram comes to power.
[Amit Varma]: But the Janata experiment, as we know, kind of fails.
[Amit Varma]: And after that, you know, Vajpayee and Advani form the Bharatiya Janata Party, which is
[Amit Varma]: suddenly committed to Gandhian socialism.
[Amit Varma]: And the vision seems entirely different from whatever it was before, to the extent that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, they disassociate themselves from, you know, religious imagery and language and
[Amit Varma]: rhetoric and all of that, to the point where the RSS stopped supporting them, you know.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, you could say Vajpayee makes that shift at exactly the wrong time when
[Amit Varma]: the political winds are shifting.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about that period and why are Vajpayee and Advani going into
[Amit Varma]: this interesting direction and, you know, what do the changing political winds then
[Guest]: mean for them?
[Guest]: Amit, the direction that Vajpayee chooses is driven by one thing, which is that where
[Guest]: he thinks the voter is headed.
[Guest]: Vajpayee's analysis of the 1970s in India is even though the Congress is in decline,
[Guest]: Congressism or the Nehruvian consensus has not been rejected by the voter.
[Guest]: So while the voter in 1977 rejects Indira Gandhi, they don't reject the larger principles
[Guest]: on which the Nehruvian consensus is built.
[Guest]: More importantly, even the anti-Indira political parties, the BLD, Jai Prakash Narayan, they
[Guest]: don't fundamentally reject the Nehruvian consensus.
[Guest]: What they don't like is the authoritarian figure of Indira Gandhi.
[Guest]: And Vajpayee realizes that for the Jan Sangh to become mainstream, there is no other, this
[Guest]: is the only opposition in town.
[Guest]: So if you want to take down the Congress, which is the hundred pound gorilla in the
[Guest]: room, you have to merge yourself into a non-Congress opposition, which actually shares many of
[Guest]: the precepts of the Nehruvian consensus, which is what he's able to do.
[Guest]: And as you pointed out, Jan Sangh is the largest constituent of the Janata party in the 77
[Guest]: elections.
[Guest]: So logically, Vajpayee should have been prime minister, but they don't even begin to ask
[Guest]: that question because they're like, look, we're grateful that we're part of you.
[Guest]: You know, that's not even, let's not ask for more than we can get.
[Guest]: And that again shows a certain sagacity and a certain ability to avoid the immediate greed
[Guest]: of power.
[Guest]: They're interested in the long game.
[Guest]: They are marathon runners.
[Guest]: They are not hundred meter runners.
[Guest]: And I think that's something quite remarkable.
[Guest]: And the other aspect that you pointed out, which is that not just Vajpayee, but even
[Guest]: the RSS wanted Jagjivan Ram.
[Guest]: Jagjivan Ram, by the way, is a complex figure.
[Guest]: I mean, his father was a priest, you know, he knew Sanskrit.
[Guest]: So he was scheduled caste, but he was highly Sanskritized.
[Guest]: But they wanted the symbolism of a Dalit prime minister, India's first, and I think only
[Guest]: Dalit prime minister would have come through because the Jan Sangh wanted him.
[Guest]: And that was stymied by other parties, namely Charan Singh.
[Guest]: But again, it tells you something about the party, right?
[Guest]: While they are in power between 1977 and 80, they don't go outside the Nehruvian consensus.
[Guest]: This is more classically the case when it comes to foreign policy that Vajpayee continues
[Guest]: to follow the non-aligned movement in some sense.
[Guest]: So they are very, very careful.
[Guest]: And I think that again, that shows a certain ability to sort of run the long distance rather
[Guest]: than short distance.
[Unknown]: The problem again, not for India, which I leave your listeners to decide what is in
[Guest]: India's interest.
[Guest]: But the problem for Hindu nationalism is that this analysis that Vajpayee has of the Indian
[Guest]: voter in the 70s, he carries over to the 80s, but a lot of changes are happening in the
[Guest]: 80s.
[Guest]: There's the breakdown of the Congress system.
[Guest]: There's Hindu anxiety because of the Khalistan movement, which is targeting Hindus of all
[Guest]: castes.
[Guest]: There's an anxiety among upper caste Hindus in North India, for example, Gujarat, where
[Guest]: there is an increase in OBC reservations.
[Guest]: And there's a sense that Saudi petrodollars is expanding conversions of lower caste Hindus
[Guest]: into Muslims.
[Guest]: So there's a sense of anxiety.
[Guest]: And again, not my job to judge whether it's a valid anxiety or not, but there is an anxiety
[Guest]: and it's demand drawn.
[Guest]: Now at precisely this time, Vajpayee, who one of the core arguments I make in this book
[Guest]: is he's not a mass politician.
[Guest]: He has his year to parliament.
[Guest]: He doesn't have his year to the ground.
[Guest]: And there's a difference between the two, because changes in the ground may take a little
[Guest]: while to percolate to parliament.
[Guest]: It's not immediate.
[Guest]: Whereas I think someone like Indira Gandhi and Narendra Modi have a direct connect with
[Guest]: the voters.
[Guest]: So Vajpayee doesn't get it.
[Guest]: So even in the early 80s, when the Bharatiya Janata Party is created in 1980, he actually
[Guest]: wants it to be a continuation of Jayaprakash Narayan's vision.
[Guest]: Hence, even the name, I think the most important relic of the Janata experiment that remains
[Guest]: today is the name Bharatiya Janata Party.
[Guest]: It's the same name, he just put Bharatiya in front of it.
[Guest]: He made sure that there was a prominent Muslim leader, Sikandar Bhakta.
[Guest]: He said very clearly that we don't follow, we won't follow Hindu nationalist ideology.
[Guest]: We will follow Jayaprakash Narayan's ideology.
[Guest]: What we will do is we follow Hindu nationalist discipline, because what he felt the Janata
[Guest]: experiment lacked was just discipline and teamwork.
[Guest]: So he wanted to take Hindu nationalist teamwork with Jayaprakash's ideology.
[Guest]: And as I point out, you know, in the early 1980s, he's exactly wrong.
[Guest]: Again, it's not anxiety that is created by the RSS or VHP, but the RSS and VHP see this
[Guest]: and they see that the party of the Hindus, the BJP is actually turning left, is turning
[Guest]: secular.
[Guest]: So they then activate this Hindu anxiety even more and Indira Gandhi, who's a far better
[Guest]: politician in that sense than Vajpayee, as a mass level, sees this Hindu anxiety.
[Guest]: She plays to it.
[Guest]: She goes to temples, she wears saffron saris.
[Guest]: In the, I think 1982 or 83, there are elections in Jammu and Kashmir.
[Guest]: And as your listeners know, Jammu has a lot of Hindus and the valley is exclusively Muslim.
[Guest]: So she campaigns for the Hindu votes in the, and I mean Indira Gandhi, campaigns for the
[Guest]: Hindu vote in Jammu in that election, using the bogey of national conference, Farooq Abdullah
[Guest]: and the valley's Muslims, right?
[Guest]: And she portrays herself as, you know, goddess Durga committed to keeping India united against
[Guest]: the Khalistan movement and even gives her life for the movement, the RSS notices.
[Guest]: And so in the 1984 elections held immediately after Indira Gandhi's murder, the RSS actually
[Guest]: campaigns and votes for Rajiv Gandhi because, and I quote an RSS essay in their mouthpiece
[Guest]: organizer just after the election saying that, look, Rajiv won because he was the Hindu party
[Guest]: and Vajpayee lost because he was not the Hindu party.
[Guest]: And that begins Vajpayee's long exile from the BJP beginning in 1986, all the way to
[Guest]: 1995.
[Guest]: So to answer your question, I think Vajpayee's analysis of where India was heading in the
[Guest]: 1970s was right.
[Guest]: Someone like Balraj Madhok was wrong in this regard.
[Guest]: I don't think the Jansangh would have survived in the seventies by being the party of capitalism,
[Guest]: much as many of your listeners would have preferred that.
[Guest]: I just don't think the political mood was, was for that.
[Guest]: And the eighties on the other hand, Vajpayee read it completely wrong and Advani read it
[Guest]: better because he had his ear closer to the card.
[Guest]: So Advani, I show him, you know, facing the biggest test of loyalty in his life because
[Guest]: he doesn't want to reject Vajpayee the person, but he has to reject Vajpayee the ideology
[Guest]: and he does it.
[Guest]: And what is remarkable about the BJP is that this happens without a split to the party
[Guest]: in any other party, Amit, this would have resulted in a split.
[Amit Varma]: No, and I was struck by, you know, the words of the RSS where they called the 1984 elections
[Amit Varma]: as a quote, massive Hindu mandate, end quote for Rajiv Gandhi, which is very telling.
[Amit Varma]: And you talk about how that big growing Hindu vote bank between 1980 and 1984 just goes
[Amit Varma]: for the Congress.
[Amit Varma]: And, and you sort of point out another very sort of interesting meeting after that, where,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the RSS is trying to figure out what do we do?
[Amit Varma]: And obviously the BJP needs a new leader and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And they have, of course, revived the Vishwa Hindu Parishad as a sort of, you know, a counterpoint
[Amit Varma]: to take the, you know, the hardline view forward.
[Amit Varma]: But then they decide that Vajpayee has to go and you described this fascinating meeting.
[Unknown]: I think it's in Gandhinagar, where the young Amit Shah has to, I think, grind paan for
[Unknown]: Vijay Rajesh.
[Amit Varma]: Beetle nut.
[Amit Varma]: He has to grind beetle nut for Vijay Rajesh India, who's sitting in a room with Atal and
[Amit Varma]: at one point where he's handing over the beetle nut, you know, that this message comes from
[Amit Varma]: the RSS that Vajpayee has to step down and Vijay Rajesh has to take over.
[Amit Varma]: And Vijay Rajesh, again, a very interesting figure.
[Amit Varma]: I was, I wish you'd written more about her where she just doesn't want power.
[Amit Varma]: She's an incredible patron, practically funds a party single-handedly for a long time, but
[Amit Varma]: just doesn't want the spoils of power and she doesn't want to hurt Vajpayee.
[Amit Varma]: So eventually she doesn't take it and it goes to Advani.
[Amit Varma]: Now, tell me a little bit about how that shift happens.
[Amit Varma]: Does it affect the personal relationship between the two men?
[Amit Varma]: Does Vajpayee completely withdraw or is he a humble party servant?
[Amit Varma]: And what's happening in the next few years as far as the Hindu vote is concerned?
[Amit Varma]: Because those are tumultuous years for Indian politics, say, you know, leading to VP Singh
[Amit Varma]: coming to power.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, we'll, you know, discuss that phase in Ayodhya right after this.
[Amit Varma]: But in that period, the second half of the 80s, what's the dynamic there?
[Amit Varma]: What is going on?
[Amit Varma]: Ramayana and Mahabharata also become really popular at that time.
[Amit Varma]: Give me a sort of a picture of what the party is going through in that period.
[Guest]: Well, I mean, for those of your listeners who are strong critics of the BJP and who
[Guest]: are supporters of the Congress, or rather who see the Congress party as the only quote
[Guest]: unquote secular possible opposition to the BJP, if you're that kind of person, I think
[Guest]: you would agree with me that Rajiv Gandhi was absolutely the worst thing that should
[Guest]: have happened during that period.
[Guest]: Because and here's a tragedy, you know, he came across as Mr. Clean, the kind of euphoria
[Guest]: that greets Rajiv Gandhi when he becomes prime minister in late 1984, you know, he's seen
[Guest]: as it's very similar to, you know, the John F. Kennedy mania in the United States of the
[Guest]: 1960s.
[Guest]: He could do no wrong.
[Guest]: He, you know, he's a modernizer, unlike his brother, younger brother, Sanjay, he kept
[Guest]: away from politics.
[Guest]: So he was seen as clean.
[Guest]: He was seen as a reluctant man.
[Guest]: A lot of the people who surrounded him were, you know, people from school who had private
[Guest]: sector education.
[Guest]: So there was a thrill that went in India, especially the middle class, that he was the
[Guest]: right man at the right time.
[Guest]: He actually turned out to be the wrong man in the wrong time because his extraordinary
[Guest]: inexperience meant that his counter to this Hindu anxiety was to pander it.
[Guest]: It wasn't to tamp it down the way Mahatma Gandhi had done, which is you see Hindu anxiety
[Guest]: in the 20s and the 40s, but you actually, that's the leader, right?
[Guest]: You see anxiety and you calm your people down.
[Guest]: He exaggerates it.
[Guest]: So he opens the locks for Babri Masjid for prayer in 1986, I think.
[Guest]: And then in 1989, he, I think 1985 or 1986 for prayer.
[Guest]: And in 1989, he opens, he allows Shilanyas or bricklaying ceremony in Ayodhya.
[Guest]: And it's not a coincidence, Amit, that recently after the new temple was inaugurated in Ayodhya,
[Guest]: I think it was the Madhya Pradesh Congress, which ran an advertisement saying that actually
[Guest]: it was Rajiv Gandhi who did it.
[Guest]: So if you buy the rhetoric that the BJP is a communal party, Rajiv Gandhi got there first,
[Guest]: you know.
[Guest]: And then he sort of, he did a jugalbandi of this, you know, Hindu communalism with Muslim
[Guest]: communalism.
[Guest]: He was, India, I think was the first country under Rajiv Gandhi to ban the satanic verses.
[Guest]: He annulls the Supreme Court judgment when it comes to Shabanu by passing a law and,
[Guest]: you know, which did the exact opposite of protecting Muslim women.
[Guest]: So here was a man who sees these various Hindu and Muslim anxieties not of his making, responds
[Guest]: not with high-minded liberalism, but pandering of the worst kind, you know, absolutely worst
[Guest]: kind.
[Guest]: And that is the box or the hole that the new party president, Lal Krishna Advani finds
[Guest]: himself in, in 1986, that you have Hindu anxiety, but actually that Hindu anxiety is being sought
[Guest]: to be monopolized by the Congress party.
[Guest]: And if he doesn't move to the right of the Congress party, you know, he risks a repetition
[Guest]: of the 1984 results where the Congress gets all the Hindu votes and that, it is this kind
[Guest]: of context, Amit, in which the Lal Krishna Advani finally accepts the Ayodhya movement.
[Guest]: The Ayodhya movement began by the RSS, BHP and I hope your listeners are listening to
[Guest]: this two congressmen on stage in 1983 for the Ayodhya movement and very soon Rajiv Gandhi
[Guest]: adopts it.
[Guest]: It takes to 1989 for the BJP to adopt it under Lal Krishna Advani.
[Guest]: And as I point out, you know, he gets on the Rath Yatra, it's an opportunistic reaction
[Guest]: to the Mandal commission recommendations being implemented.
[Guest]: And in many ways, the book argues that Advani's about right turn was actually a signal to
[Guest]: his own cadre and his own movement that the BJP doesn't want to get left behind.
[Guest]: And all through this period, Vajpayee feels that what Advani is doing is wrong.
[Guest]: He feels that religion and politics shouldn't mix.
[Guest]: And Amit, you had asked me this question earlier that, you know, which is the real Vajpayee?
[Guest]: Is he, you know, is he the liberal or is he really wearing a mask?
[Guest]: It's hard to say because at that time, his anger is quite genuine.
[Guest]: He feels this is absolutely the wrong way to go.
[Guest]: And in fact, he tells Advani that the problem with riding a tiger is that you can never
[Guest]: get off.
[Guest]: And I think he genuinely believes that.
[Guest]: At the same time, I think Vajpayee is being ignored by the party.
[Guest]: He travels on his own quite a bit in India, but most of the time he's spending time in
[Guest]: the US with his, you know, or he's in his house in Delhi and he has a little bit of
[Guest]: Kothari and they're eating, as I point out in the book, prawn curry, a little bit of
[Guest]: whiskey.
[Guest]: Vajpayee loved opium or Bhang pakodas.
[Guest]: And you know, so this is the loser's quote.
[Guest]: So Vajpayee is being sidelined and these are the people around him.
[Guest]: People like Rajesh Mishra, Jaswant Singh.
[Guest]: And the thing is that once Vajpayee comes to power in 96 and then 98, he doesn't forget
[Guest]: these people because they stood with him when nobody else was standing.
[Guest]: Now Advani is not invited to these sorries because he doesn't drink, he doesn't eat meat
[Guest]: and he doesn't, you know, he doesn't gossip.
[Guest]: He doesn't do that kind of thing.
[Guest]: On the other hand, relations between the two, I think both make a huge effort to keep it
[Guest]: going.
[Guest]: So from Advani's side, I think it's loyalty.
[Guest]: From Vajpayee's side, it's a recognition that his sidelining in the party is not because
[Guest]: of Advani.
[Guest]: It's because the party itself is going in a different direction.
[Guest]: And Advani is his one insurance, then when things change, then Vajpayee is back in business.
[Guest]: I also think, you know, I don't want to portray Vajpayee as too cynical.
[Guest]: I also think he liked Advani.
[Guest]: So while the professional relationship between them is ruptured, the personal relationship
[Guest]: somehow manages during this period.
[Amit Varma]: No, and I can't underscore the point you made earlier about the Congress's alleged secularism,
[Amit Varma]: which you know, the BJP themselves used to use the term pseudo secularism, which was
[Amit Varma]: very interesting because if you're against pseudo secularism, one would assume you're
[Amit Varma]: against a pseudo part of it and therefore you don't mind secularism.
[Amit Varma]: But they were against both pseudo secularism and secularism.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, the point to underscore and what I feel strongly about is that the Congress
[Amit Varma]: today on the ground is the party of Kamal Nath.
[Amit Varma]: To call it a non-communal party is just a joke.
[Amit Varma]: They've always been quoting the Hindu vote, which they continue to do today.
[Amit Varma]: And for all of Rahul Gandhi's woke posturing on Twitter, the bottom line is that he has
[Amit Varma]: never actually come to, you know, spoken about the horrors of the past or, you know, tried
[Amit Varma]: to come to terms with them, not just what his father did, but also what his grandmother
[Amit Varma]: Indira Gandhi did.
[Amit Varma]: And I think for everything wrong that Modi has done, and he's a horrendous, horrendous
[Amit Varma]: prime minister, and this is just my opinion, of course, I think Indira was worse.
[Amit Varma]: Indira was just a moral monster for the kind of things that she did, which is why it's
[Amit Varma]: difficult to take the Congress party seriously, as long as they have portraits of Indira Gandhi
[Amit Varma]: on the wall.
[Guest]: But that sort of...
[Guest]: Can I interrupt you, if you don't mind?
[Guest]: Sure.
[Guest]: Look, I'm just being descriptive, right?
[Amit Varma]: I know.
[Guest]: So because I have views, I have pretty strong views and, you know, if you read my book,
[Guest]: I mean, you know, I think you know that we agree on many things more than we disagree,
[Guest]: but that's not the point here.
[Guest]: I'm much more sympathetic about Indira Gandhi as a stunningly good politician.
[Guest]: Whatever else you can say about her moral feelings, she was a very good politician.
[Guest]: Her son was a bumbling politician.
[Guest]: His sin is incompetence.
[Guest]: It was, you know, he was a pilot who didn't have a heart in this and, you know, and he
[Guest]: was confronting India, these massive crises in India, and he was just clueless despite
[Guest]: having this mandate.
[Guest]: I think that's a much worse sin, right?
[Guest]: Or whatever, I leave your listeners to ask that question.
[Guest]: And in that, I think Rahul Gandhi, you know, reminds me a lot more of his father rather
[Guest]: than his grandmother, because, you know, from all accounts, he's a, you know, personally
[Guest]: polite person.
[Guest]: He's personally charming.
[Guest]: You know, he's well brought up, but he's just, you know, for the kind of changes that is
[Guest]: going on in India, he could not be, you know, worse place to deal with.
[Guest]: And that definitely reminds me of Rajiv Gandhi during that period.
[Amit Varma]: No, the reason I partly called Indira Gandhi a moral monster is includes what you just
[Amit Varma]: said about her incredible politics, because she was such an incredible politician.
[Amit Varma]: She took decisions and took the country in directions, which were going to be disastrous
[Amit Varma]: for the people and were horrible in terms of governance, and she didn't give a damn
[Amit Varma]: about that.
[Amit Varma]: That wasn't even a factor.
[Amit Varma]: Her only factor, much as in fact, it is for the current dispensation, is that how do I
[Amit Varma]: craft the narrative to win elections, governance, you know, and in that sense, when, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Narendra Modi did demonetization, which I call the largest assault on property rights
[Amit Varma]: in human history.
[Amit Varma]: The moment I heard about that measure, I thought, oh, this is, you know, just the kind of thing
[Amit Varma]: Indira Gandhi would do, you know, just thinking of narrative and not giving a damn about what
[Amit Varma]: actually happens on the ground.
[Amit Varma]: But that aside, and I must point out to my listeners that this is me giving my opinion.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, none of this is in the book.
[Amit Varma]: None of this is in the book.
[Amit Varma]: This is just me giving my opinion.
[Amit Varma]: Vinay's book is only about facts and in that sense is incredibly rigorous.
[Amit Varma]: Now, let's talk about that period after Rajiv Gandhi comes out of power.
[Amit Varma]: Now, we already spoke earlier in the episode about what is happening when, you know, V.P.
[Amit Varma]: Singh is in power.
[Amit Varma]: Devi Lal is doing his little thing there.
[Amit Varma]: V.P.
[Amit Varma]: Singh feels insecure about that.
[Amit Varma]: So he does Mandal.
[Amit Varma]: Now, L.K.
[Amit Varma]: Advani, who is, you know, in charge of BJP is now in a spot, how do I react to Mandal?
[Amit Varma]: There are all these pressures and this could divide sort of the Hindu vote.
[Amit Varma]: But I need to bring it together for me.
[Amit Varma]: What do I do?
[Amit Varma]: Oh, there's Ayodhya.
[Amit Varma]: Let's do a Rath Yatra.
[Amit Varma]: And you speak about, you know, Atal Bihari, Vajpayee, in fact, you quote him as saying,
[Amit Varma]: quote, the difficulty of the Rath, once you ride it, you do not feel like getting down
[Amit Varma]: from it.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And at another point, he asked L.K.
[Amit Varma]: Advani that don't do this.
[Amit Varma]: He says, you know, quote, you're riding a tiger, stop quote, which is really interesting to
[Amit Varma]: me.
[Amit Varma]: I want to sort of point out that this changes Advani in a kind of fundamental ways, as I
[Amit Varma]: think Swapan Dasgupta remarked that the Rath Yatra changes him in fundamental ways, almost
[Amit Varma]: as if he has taken this direction and the Mukhota becomes a person, so to say, the mask
[Amit Varma]: becomes a person.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about this phase of time leading up to Ayodhya and one of the
[Amit Varma]: sort of, you know, when you go deep into that, when you go deep into the nuances of what
[Amit Varma]: actually happened, what strikes me there is that just as in the 1980s, the whole resurgence
[Amit Varma]: of the Hindu vote was a bottom up thing, which, you know, Vajpayee and Advani were first completely
[Amit Varma]: taken aback by.
[Amit Varma]: What is happening now also is that the movement is a bottom up thing.
[Amit Varma]: And that Vajpayee and even Advani, from what seems to from the narrative, have much less
[Amit Varma]: control than most people, including Narsimha Rao, appear to think they do.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about that phase, especially as this episode releases on the 6th of December,
[Amit Varma]: which is, of course, a, you know, a sort of a historic day.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about the lead up to that, because what is really interesting is that you have
[Amit Varma]: political Hindutva, the supply end of political Hindutva, gathering force at a time when,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the people at the top aren't really in control of events anymore.
[Amit Varma]: And there are things happening, which have a momentum of their own.
[Guest]: Tell me a bit about that.
[Guest]: I think that's exactly right.
[Guest]: Because, you know, and it's not like, let's just take a step back, Amit, to focus a little
[Guest]: bit on the period 1990 to 91.
[Guest]: There are three different momentums or three different forces in India, which have a momentum
[Guest]: of their own.
[Guest]: One is, of course, the OBC reservations in North India, which then culminates in Mandal
[Guest]: Commission report.
[Guest]: But Mandal Commission report didn't begin OBC reservations in India, it actually ended
[Guest]: it because in the 60s itself, in the states like Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka, etc.
[Guest]: You had OBC reservation and by the 80s, this had entered North India.
[Guest]: So the OBC reservations and the central level and central government job was the culmination
[Guest]: of this force.
[Guest]: The other, of course, is the Rath Yatra or Mandir.
[Guest]: As I point out, there was a bottom up force that was activated by the RSS and VHP and
[Guest]: the movement began in 1983 itself, seven years before the Rath Yatra.
[Guest]: And the third, let's not forget, Amit, was the catastrophic failure of the Indian economy.
[Guest]: And again, it was not fated that you would end up with liberalization, but something
[Guest]: had to give.
[Guest]: So Indira Gandhi herself tried with the LKJ commission report, the Alexander commission
[Guest]: report on economic changes, Rajiv Gandhi tried a little bit, but it was really left to Narsimha
[Guest]: Rao to open up.
[Guest]: Now, the point I make in my book is that all of these three events, which is Mandal, Mandir
[Guest]: and market, were not inevitable.
[Guest]: When VP Singh comes to power, yes, there is an OBC reservation, they did talk about it
[Guest]: in the manifesto itself, but had it not been for Devi Lal's attempt to upstage VP Singh,
[Guest]: he may never have implemented the Mandal commission report.
[Guest]: If the government had changed and the Congress come back, they would have never implemented
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: Because the commission report was submitted in 1980 itself and for 10 years, the Congress
[Guest]: government didn't want to touch it.
[Guest]: This ditto with Mandir, if it hadn't been for the Mandal commission report, Advani was
[Guest]: still in his Hamlet-like ability of should I, should I not, he wouldn't have decisively
[Guest]: got on to the rut.
[Guest]: And as I argued in my previous book, Half Line, if it wasn't for Narsimha Rao, you may
[Guest]: not have been so decisive when it came to liberalization.
[Guest]: And I just want to take your listeners back to a question we had right in the beginning
[Guest]: of this podcast, which is the role that events and people play alongside structures and larger
[Guest]: changes.
[Guest]: And I think Mandal, Mandir and Markit are good examples of that, that yes, there were
[Guest]: larger forces, but it was not fated.
[Guest]: And all those three decisions which LK Advani makes on Mandal, Mandir and Markit, which
[Guest]: is to support OBC reservations, support Mandal, to support Mandir and to support Markit was
[Guest]: not inevitable.
[Guest]: And I point out in the book, many pulls and pressures he had.
[Guest]: And for good or for worse, those three decisions define the party today, which is that BJP
[Guest]: is known as the pro-Mandir party, it is known also as an OBC party.
[Guest]: And I know many of your listeners would disagree, but at least it plays a superficial mouth
[Guest]: value to the benefits of liberalization.
[Guest]: And that's very important because that 1991 period is a real pivot in Indian history.
[Guest]: It could have turned out very differently.
[Guest]: Yes, there were the larger forces, but only looking at a larger forces and saying that
[Guest]: these were inevitable in India, or to put it differently, looking just as demand side
[Guest]: explanations to say that supply will soon follow, it need not have turned out that way.
[Guest]: So in that sense, it's an enormous pivot.
[Guest]: And I want to end with the question you asked, because today, your listeners are hearing
[Guest]: it on December 6, 2020.
[Guest]: And on December 6, 1992, there was a very different event in India, which is the demolition
[Guest]: of the Babri Masjid.
[Guest]: And Amit, I got to tell you that the Babri Masjid haunts me in many ways.
[Guest]: So as I told you, right in the beginning of the podcast, I remember the Bombay riots,
[Guest]: I remember seeing the timber yards on the other side of Mahim Bay burning from the terrace
[Guest]: of my building.
[Guest]: But also in my Narsimha Rao book, I devoted a whole chapter to it.
[Guest]: And once again, in this book, I devote an entire chapter to Babri Masjid.
[Guest]: And broadly, you know, so I think I've done more research on the subject and talk to more
[Guest]: people than most, I would say with some confidence.
[Guest]: And you know, I don't want to reveal more to your listener, because you know, she and
[Guest]: he should read it.
[Guest]: But in short, I'm more convinced that things went out of control, rather than a well planned
[Guest]: conspiracy from the top.
[Guest]: There was a conspiracy.
[Guest]: The question is, was the top leadership of the BJP involved?
[Guest]: You would never know, because there's a lot of smokes and mirrors happening here.
[Guest]: The trial court has actually exonerated everybody saying there's no conspiracy.
[Guest]: I don't agree with that.
[Guest]: But it seems certainly plausible that someone like Advani and Vajpayee were blindsided by
[Guest]: things getting out of hand, rather than, you know, well planned conspiracy from the top.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, one of the sort of memorable sentences from your book and earlier, you claim that
[Amit Varma]: you are not into good sentences and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And that's completely untrue.
[Amit Varma]: And one of my favorite sentences from the book is when you're describing Advani and
[Amit Varma]: Joshi at the site where, you know, things are going out of their hand and you write
[Amit Varma]: quote, they look like prisoners rather than wardens, stop quote, which to me, like sums
[Amit Varma]: up so much not just about that event, but possibly a lot more than that.
[Amit Varma]: And then you also write about how, you know, Atal Bihari Vajpayee, of course, chose not
[Amit Varma]: to go to Ayodhya and was apprehensive about what would happen there.
[Amit Varma]: And he's in Delhi.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, when the demolition starts, N M Khatate, his old friend goes to meet him.
[Amit Varma]: And you quote Khatate as saying quote, he was all alone watching TV.
[Amit Varma]: He was very, very angry.
[Amit Varma]: He could not believe what had happened, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And there's sort of, and that's just a very interesting dynamic, you know, we don't have
[Amit Varma]: much time.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to get to sort of closing question in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: But again, I would say that I have barely touched upon sort of the depth and nuance
[Amit Varma]: that is in your book.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, even the period after this through the 90s, Vajpayee becoming Prime Minister,
[Amit Varma]: the sort of the two short terms, and then that one longish term, and then Modi and Shah
[Amit Varma]: coming back, all of it is fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And it's like a thriller unfolding in front of you and an ongoing thriller as it were.
[Amit Varma]: So it's impossible to kind of put it down.
[Amit Varma]: I want to sort of end with something that you said in a recent interview for Scroll
[Amit Varma]: with Rohan Venkat, where in response to something that he said, you spoke about how quote, a
[Amit Varma]: Hindu group consciousness that you are Hindu, I am Hindu, let's vote for the same party
[Amit Varma]: that has to be constructed.
[Amit Varma]: That's a hundred year project of Hindu nationalism, which is why when you look at the wording
[Amit Varma]: of Hindu nationalism is politically liberal in that it is premised on the idea of one
[Amit Varma]: person, one vote, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you've spoken about the Hindu group consciousness, you are Hindu, I am Hindu, let's vote for
[Amit Varma]: the same party.
[Amit Varma]: Now, obviously, people contain multitudes, which has become a cliche on my show.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, and it might be the case that, let us say that I am a Hindu, and you can
[Amit Varma]: appeal to that part of me, when you're trying to build this Hindu group consciousness.
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, what canny politicians would always look out for is that other other parts
[Amit Varma]: of people's personality, which we can appeal to, which they can care about enough to vote
[Amit Varma]: for it, that don't go down this axis.
[Amit Varma]: So for example, a lot of the ideas of Congress are just abstract ideas and often insincerely
[Amit Varma]: expressed by them to begin with, like concepts of secularism or all the abstract ideas of
[Amit Varma]: India that come about.
[Amit Varma]: And I would argue that in our lived reality as well, besides a Hindu consciousness, there
[Amit Varma]: is also a sort of, there is something syncretic to it, there is something, you know, while
[Amit Varma]: our society in many ways is deeply liberal, there are many ways in which it is deeply
[Amit Varma]: liberal in the way that we embrace influences from everywhere and make this delightful khichdi,
[Amit Varma]: like Vajpayee himself in his own personality, if not in his politics.
[Amit Varma]: So my sort of rambling question to you right at the end is that, you know, in all your
[Amit Varma]: studies of sort of political theory, not just in India and elsewhere, is it something that
[Amit Varma]: would give you the sense that assuming that this Hindu consciousness has been captured
[Amit Varma]: by this one party at the center, and it's done for, and it would appear that even other
[Amit Varma]: parties like the Aam Aadmi Party and the Congress are very cognizant of it.
[Amit Varma]: And they work within the bounds of, you know, they don't want to displease this Hindu consciousness,
[Amit Varma]: so to say, you know, are there other aspects to our nature that also unite us, other things
[Amit Varma]: that we care about, that can in future become a locus of political movements?
[Guest]: So that's a deep question, I mean, like your other questions, but this is a deep question.
[Guest]: And let me just rephrase it in my language, which is the following, which is that if you
[Guest]: just buy this idea that India is a Hindu majority country, and you had this one party that has
[Guest]: been able to activate Hindu group consciousness, is politics as we know over?
[Guest]: Because there's no other way in which you can localize, you can kind of find another
[Guest]: loci of identity.
[Guest]: So one is that it's true that India is a Hindu majority country, but India is also a peasant
[Guest]: majority country.
[Guest]: It's a majority peasant country, it's a majority of workers and peasants.
[Guest]: Why doesn't the Communist Party come to power?
[Guest]: India is a majority Bahujan country, you know, non-Apakasa 80%.
[Guest]: Why didn't Kanchiram come to power?
[Guest]: So the first answer to your question is that rather than look for other identity access,
[Guest]: maybe the real answer lies in better organization.
[Guest]: You know, rather than trying to find a magic that, you know, to counter Hindu group consciousness
[Guest]: by something else, how about like picking parties which just focus on better organization
[Guest]: and in that learn something from the BJP, don't split, right?
[Guest]: Believe in teamwork, right?
[Guest]: Even when there's disagreement, kind of stick around because things may come your part.
[Guest]: That's the purpose of this book, that look, the inevitability of the BJP's rise is not
[Guest]: true.
[Guest]: There's hard work there.
[Guest]: There's teamwork there.
[Guest]: Yes, it's a majoritarian ideology, but there's no shortage of majoritarian ideologies in
[Guest]: India.
[Guest]: Why did this particular one win?
[Guest]: So that's the first sort of answer to the question that you asked.
[Guest]: The second answer, Amit, is to ask the question that is the only way to defeat the BJP through
[Guest]: another group identity or is there another way to conceptualize the individual?
[Guest]: Unfortunately on this question, I'm a pessimist, which is that the beginning of Hindu nationalism
[Guest]: is the introduction of one person, one vote to a group-based society where Indians think
[Guest]: in their social and economic lives are entirely in terms of groups.
[Guest]: What makes Indian politics flexible is that the group definition keeps changing.
[Guest]: Sometimes you vote on the basis of your region, sometimes your caste, sometimes your religion,
[Guest]: but you're still voting on the basis of groups.
[Guest]: Now the question is, will Indians ever start voting on the basis of individual freedom?
[Guest]: That's really the question.
[Guest]: And if that happens, that's a genuine counter to the BJP.
[Guest]: Stop telling me how to celebrate Valentine's Day.
[Guest]: Stop telling me what to eat in my house.
[Guest]: These are all based on the idea of individual freedom.
[Guest]: The reason, Amit, that those critics of the BJP don't have popular purchase, they just
[Guest]: don't have popular purchase, is in India we yet don't have a constituency which is liberal.
[Guest]: And I define liberal in the very limited sense of putting individual freedom at the center
[Guest]: of your politics.
[Guest]: So that's a pretty pessimistic answer because that is a fundamental counter to the BJP.
[Guest]: But none of the BJP's opposition parties want to go that path, especially the Congress party.
[Guest]: That's not what they're into.
[Guest]: And maybe they're not going down that path because Indians aren't ready for that kind
[Guest]: of argument.
[Guest]: So that's, you know, I'm sorry to end this long, long podcast on a slightly pessimistic
[Guest]: note.
[Guest]: But, you know, I want to end this by asking what you think, because I think, you know,
[Guest]: hearing your podcast, this is a question you obsess over again and again and again.
[Amit Varma]: No, I agree with you entirely.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, my hope would be that a great locus would be individual freedom because we are
[Amit Varma]: all individuals first.
[Amit Varma]: And then after that, we construct all these other group identities and whatever around
[Amit Varma]: us.
[Amit Varma]: And I do not see it happening.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm as pessimistic about it.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you know, one thing that gives me hope is that look, the future is full of unknown
[Amit Varma]: unknowns.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, one can just hope for things that are currently beyond our conception and
[Amit Varma]: maybe good things will come out of that.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that I do hope for is that the next time we, you know, do an episode
[Amit Varma]: together, perhaps on your first book on Narasimha Rao, which is as fascinating a subject that
[Amit Varma]: you'll give me five or six hours because today I really felt like we could have gone on and
[Amit Varma]: on and on.
[Amit Varma]: But unfortunately, you know, we are both human and there is only so much time for this.
[Amit Varma]: But thank you so much for your generosity in sharing your time and your insights.
[Amit Varma]: I, you know, I'm going to read your book again carefully because there is so much to process
[Amit Varma]: and I recommend that all my listeners do the same.
[Guest]: So thanks so much for coming on the show.
[Guest]: Thanks, Amit.
[Guest]: And I'm totally sold on to this on what you're doing, because I haven't had this discussion
[Guest]: with anyone with this kind of depth.
[Guest]: And I think that, you know, it's the medium and it's you who makes it possible, which
[Guest]: is if you go back to our original debate about, you know, structure or technology and individuals,
[Guest]: I think in the case of seen and unseen, it's both here.
[Amit Varma]: So thank you very much.
[Amit Varma]: You are the first historian to tell me that the great man of history is true by pointing
[Guest]: out that the great man is me.
[Guest]: Thank you so much.
[Guest]: Thanks.
[Guest]: Thanks a lot, Amit.
[Unknown]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, head on over to your nearest bookstore online
[Amit Varma]: or offline and pick up Jugalbandi, the BJP before Modi by Vinay Sitapati.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Vinay on Twitter at Vinay underscore Sitapati.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: Bye.